 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL  
ROADMAP  
FOR  
DEVICES AND SYSTEMS™ 
 
2022 UPDATE 
  
 
YIELD ENHANCEMENT 
 
 
THE IRDS IS DEVISED AND INTENDED FOR TECHNOLOGY ASSESSMENT ONLY AND IS WITHOUT REGARD TO ANY 
COMMERCIAL CONSIDERATIONS PERTAINING TO INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS OR EQUIPMENT. 
 
 
 

ii 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
© 2022 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any 
current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating 
new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in 
other works. 
Bluetooth® SIG and its members, licensors, and suppliers own all right, title, and interest (including intellectual property 
rights) in the Services, Content, and all draft and adopted specifications for the Bluetooth standard and reserve all rights not 
expressly granted to you in these Terms or, if applicable, the SIG Member Terms. The Bluetooth logos and word marks 
referenced in the Services and Content are the trademarks of Bluetooth SIG and its affiliates. Any other company names, 
product names, service names and logos referenced in connection with the Services or Content may be the trademarks of 
their respective owners. 
Wi-Fi® and Wi-Fi Alliance® are registered trademarks of Wi-Fi Alliance. 
The IEEE emblem is a trademark owned by the IEEE. 
"IEEE", the IEEE logo, and other IEEE logos and titles (IRDSTM, IEEE 802.11™, IEEE P1785™, IEEE P287™, IEEE 
P1770™, IEEE P149™, IEEE 1720™, etc.) are registered trademarks or service marks of The Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers, Incorporated. All other products, company names or other marks appearing on these sites are the 
trademarks of their respective owners. Nothing contained in these sites should be construed as granting, by implication, 
estoppel, or otherwise, any license or right to use any trademark displayed on these sites without prior written permission 
of IEEE or other trademark owners. 
All product names, trademarks and registered trademarks are property of their respective owners. All company, product 
and service names used in this document are for identification purposes only. Use of these names, trademarks and brands 
does not imply endorsement.   
 
 

iii 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
Table of Contents 
1. 
Introduction ................................................................................................................. 1 
1.1. 
Current State of Technology ....................................................................................... 2 
1.1. 
Reliability – Emerging Technology Driver for Contamination Control .......................... 3 
1.2. 
Drivers and Technology Targets ............................................................................... 17 
1.3. 
Vision of Future Technology ..................................................................................... 17 
2. 
Scope of Report ........................................................................................................ 18 
3. 
Summary and Key Points ......................................................................................... 20 
4. 
Challenges................................................................................................................ 21 
4.1. 
Near-term Challenges —CIA .................................................................................... 21 
4.2. 
Surface Environmental Contamination Control ......................................................... 24 
4.3. 
Characterization, Inspection and Analysis ................................................................ 32 
4.4. 
Long-term Challenges .............................................................................................. 32 
5. 
Technology Requirements ........................................................................................ 32 
5.1. 
Summary .................................................................................................................. 32 
6. 
Potential Solutions .................................................................................................... 32 
6.1. 
General  .................................................................................................................... 32 
6.2. 
Surface Environmental Contamination Control ......................................................... 33 
6.3. 
Characterization, Inspection and Analysis ................................................................ 34 
7. 
Cross Teams ............................................................................................................ 34 
8. 
Emerging/Disruptive Concepts and Technologies .................................................... 34 
8.1. 
Directed Self Assembly ............................................................................................ 34 
9. 
Conclusions and Recommendations ........................................................................ 35 
10. Appendices ............................................................................................................... 35 
10.1. Appendix A—Supplemental Materials ...................................................................... 35 
10.2. Appendix B—Acronyms ............................................................................................ 36 
11. References ............................................................................................................... 39 
 
List of Figures 
Figure YE-1 Random Yield Area of Focus ......................................................................... 1 
Figure YE-2 Expected lifetime of chips in years. ................................................................ 4 
Figure YE-3 Reliability Failure Mechanisms ....................................................................... 5 
Figure YE-4 Tolerable defect density in finFET (2022) and GAA (2025) for 10-year field 
operation. ...................................................................................................... 5 
Figure YE-5 Defect Density Calculation ............................................................................. 7 
Figure YE-6 Proactive Particle Control ............................................................................... 8 
Figure YE-8 Yield Enhancement Scope ........................................................................... 18 
Figure YE-9 General Test Methodology for Ultrapure Water ............................................ 28 
Figure YE-10 Yield Enhancement IFT Cross Team Linkage Diagram ................................ 34 
 
 
 

iv 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
 
List of Tables 
Table YE-1 
Definitions for the Different Interface Points.................................................. 20 
Table YE-2 
Yield Enhancement Difficult Challenges ....................................................... 22 
Table YE-3 
Technology Requirements for Surface Environmental  
Contamination Control ................................................................................. 24 
Table YE-4 
AMC Monitoring Methods ............................................................................. 24 
Table YE-4a   Supporting Table for On-line Methods .......................................................... 24 
Table YE-4b   Supporting Table for Bulk Gas On-line Methods .......................................... 31 
Table YE-5 
Yield Requirements for MEMS Production ................................................... 32 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
Acknowledgments 
This chapter was prepared by a group of experts representing broad spectrum of knowledge and activities associated with 
contamination control and yield analysis. The Yield Enhancement forum is represented by a number of leading advanced 
semiconductor manufacturing companies, most of major semiconductor EOMs, as well as many materials, components, 
metrology, and facility technology suppliers.  
The Yield Enhancement roadmap described in this narrative is based on extensive data analysis, mathematical modeling, 
and experimental work conducted by the forum. This data correlates the criteria defining defect conditions on the surface 
of the critical substrates (wafer, lithography mask, lithography optics, etc.) with parameters of liquid chemicals, ultrapure 
water, air, gases, critical components, and thin film materials. 
The Yield Enhancement leadership team acknowledges a valuable input provided by the More Moore IFT as well as 
resources and time of all contributors involved. 
Matthijs Agricola, Latif Ahmed, Kaneko Akimasa, Gustavo Albuquerque, Roberto Alzaga, Takeru Amano, Jake 
Armstrong, Carlos Augusto, Joel Barnett, Greg Baumgart, Dwight Beal, Carlos Beitia, Jim Belanger, Didier Beloit, Glen 
Biggs, Frederic Boeuf, Yannick Borde, Bill Bottoms, Taylor Boyd, William Bozydaj, Kirk M. Bresniker, Kameron Brown, 
Will Byars, Mark Camenzind, Kirk Chassaniol, Brett Clark, Robert Clark, Nora Colligan, Patrick Connor, Dan Cowles, 
Tomasso Crisenza, Oliver Crout, Chris Davies, John DeGenova, Gil Delgado, Manuel Didierjean, Jennifer Dionne, John 
Dunleavy, Chris Ebert, Andreas Eckl, Peter Egger, Majid Entezarian, Albert Escusa, Kim Farnsworth, Arnaud Favre, 
William Forster, Dan Freeman, Guillaume Gallet, C. Michael Garner, Cesar M Garza, Astrid Gettel, Bob Gieger, Rick 
Godec, Felipe Gomez Cuba, George Gonnella, Sandhya Gopalakrishnan, Hugh Gotts, Don Hadder, Maka Havali, Yoshihiro 
Hayashi, Jim Henry, Gerd Heser, Christoph Hocke, Hideaki Iino, Hiroki Ishikuro, Ajey Jacob, Hans Jansen, Pratik Joshi, 
Jost Kames, Keith Kerwin, Kenji Kingsford, Alan Knapp, Kaoru Kondo, Vindhya Kunduru, Cristian Landoni, Enrico 
Laurin, Mark Lawrence, Ravi Laxman, Laura Ledenbach, Jae Seok Lee, Kevin Leigh, Slava Libman, Jürgen M Lobert, 
Vanda Locati, Christopher Long, Ruben Lopez-Trigo, Ce Ma, Peter Maguire, Ulrich Mantz, Rushi Matkar, Sven Mattson, 
Bob McIntosh, Paul Mertens, Matt Milburn, Tim Miller, Nabil Mistkawi, Steve Moffatt, Sungin Moon, Hiroki Morimura, 
Christopher Muller, Nobuhiko Nakano, Andreas Neuber, Alain Nezer, Rob Nine, Dick Otte, Richard Paciej, John Painter, 
Diwakar Paramasivam, Makonnen Payne, Markus Pfeffer, Andy Pham, Thomas Phely-Bobin, Kevin Prettyman, Sriram 
Ramamoorthy, Abbas Rastegar, Jan Rau, Gerd Reinig, Steffen Reyman, Chuck Richardson, Sarah Riddle, Francois Rivet, 
Dave Roberts, Dan Rodier, Steve Rogers, Jochen Ruth, Philippe Rychen, Koichiro Saga, David Schaaf, Tony Schleisman, 
Michael Schroeter, Akshey Sehgal, Archita Sengupta, Simone Severi, Ashkan Seyedi, Israel Shebley, Tony Shucosky, 
Bobbie Smith, Georg Smudde, Jim Snow, Chris Spark, Deena Starkel, Jonas Sundqvist, Lars Sundstrom, Joe Sweeney, 
Yoichi Tanaka, Alexei Tchelnokov, Vincent Terracina, Marcel Teunissen, Gregory T. Their, Ines Thurner, Van To, Koichi 
Tokudome, Ichiru Tsunemitsu, Gary Van Schooneveld, Rao Varanasi, Sarah Vogt, Juliane Weise, Ulrich Wende, Daniel 
Wiederin, Dan Wilcox, Daun Wilcox, Leif R. Wilhelmsson , Hubert Winzig, Enghwa Wong, Bernie Zerfas 

Introduction  1 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
YIELD ENHANCEMENT 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The Yield Enhancement focus area is dedicated to activity ensuring that semiconductor manufacturing set up is optimized 
towards identifying, reducing, and avoiding yield-relevant defects and contamination. 
Yield in most industries has been defined as the number of products made divided by the number of products that can be 
potentially made. In the semiconductor industry, yield is represented by the functionality and reliability of integrated circuits 
produced on the wafer surfaces. During the manufacturing of integrated circuits yield loss is caused, for example, by defects, 
faults, process variations, and design. The relationship of defects and yield, and an appropriate yield-to-defect correlation, 
is critical for yield enhancement. 
The Yield Enhancement (YE) chapter will display the current advanced and next generation future requirements for high 
yielding manufacturing of More Moore as well as More than Moore products separated in “critical process groups” 
including microelectromechanical (MEMS), back-end processes, e. g., packaging. Consequently, an inclusion of material 
specifications for Si, SiC, GaN, etc., are considered. 
In the manufacturing of integrated circuits yield loss is related to a variety of sources. During processes such as implantation, 
etching, deposition, planarization, cleaning, lithography, etc., failures responsible for yield loss occur. Several examples of 
contamination and mechanisms responsible for yield loss are listed in the following: a) airborne molecular contamination 
(AMC), b) airborne particular contamination (APC) of organic or inorganic matter caused by the environment, personnel 
or by the tools, c) process induced defects as scratches, cracks, and particles, overlay faults, and stress, d) process variations 
resulting, e.g., in differing doping profiles or layer thicknesses, e) the deviation from design, due to pattern transfer from 
the mask to the wafer, results in deviations and variations of layout and critical dimensions, and f) diffusion of atoms 
through layers and in the semiconductor bulk material. 
The determination of defects and yield, and an appropriate yield to defect correlation are essential for yield enhancement. 
The specification of tools for defect detection and classification of defect for root cause analysis addresses the technology 
requirements for More Moore and More than Moore. Out of two typical types of defects, systematic and random, Yield 
Enhancement focuses on random ones, related to the areas of technology responsible for contamination control, as shown 
in Figure YE-1. 
 
Figure YE-1   Random Yield Area of Focus 
 

2  Introduction 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
The YE chapter has two focus topics: “Substrate Environment Contamination Control” (SECC) and “Characterization, 
Inspection and Analysis (CIA)”. These two topics crosscut front-end process technology, interconnect processes, 
lithography, metrology, design, process integration, test, and facility infrastructures.” 
YE is broken down into prevention of defects, focusing on random, and CIA (characterization, inspection and analysis). 
Current focus of YE is to add reliability enhancement to our focus, both of which focus on prevention of random defects 
that result in yield loss and reliability risk through proactive contamination control. The CIA portion will identify the 
challenge of not being able to measure defects but can correlate these defects to something that we can measure. This was 
agreed to be the area for collaboration between YE and FI (Factory Integration) chapter of IRDS. Specific topics to be 
addressed are (1) analysis of data at yield excursion event s and (2) yield prediction using manufacturing big data and data 
analytics tools. 
Definition of technology needs will depend on the approach to the big data application. Potential correlation between a 
measurable parameter and a target feature that is unmeasurable directly will likely become the only feasible way to predict 
yield loss due to manufacturing issues. FI considers the use of virtual metrology as a viable method to support the needs.   
Refer to FI Chapter for more details on the technology needs in this space. 
The focus of this chapter is enabling yield improvement through defect reduction in high-volume semiconductor 
manufacturing facilities via: 
• 
Conducting ongoing risk analysis of the high purity materials, parts, utilities, and environments involved in 
advanced semiconductor manufacturing. 
• 
Proposing potential solutions and risk mitigations associated with technology gaps that limit measurement and 
control of environmental wafer, mask, or substrate contamination. 
• 
Initiating and conducting collaborative experimental studies and models to better define and quantify exposure of 
environmental contamination to wafer surfaces. Communicate results of the risks and their mitigation strategies to 
the industry in the form of the International Roadmap for Devices and Systems (IRDS) published roadmaps, 
conference presentations, and technical journal presentations. 
• 
Initiating Semiconductor Equipment and Materials International (SEMI) standard development activities to 
address the risks. 
• 
Supporting new technology trials through benchmarking studies. 
Physical device dimensions and corresponding defect dimensions continue shrinking, while device complexity is increasing 
exponentially, posing new challenges to detection as well as tolerable contamination. The wafer edges and backside surface 
were identified to show significant impact on yield. Process variations and design are also factors impacting yield. 
Additional new challenges arise specifically for MEMS manufacturing as well as assembly lines using new material. 
Development of defect detection, defect review, and classification technologies showing highest sensitivity at high 
throughput solving those challenges is crucial for cost-efficient manufacturing. Furthermore, for efficient manufacturing 
the monitoring of contamination in the environment as well as on the critical surfaces requires appropriate analytical 
capabilities. Automated, intelligent analysis and reduction algorithms, which correlate facility, design, process, electrical 
and virtual metrology results, and their correlation to yield, test and work-in-progress data, will have to be developed to 
enhance root cause analysis and therefore enable rapid yield learning. 
1.1. CURRENT STATE OF TECHNOLOGY 
Yield Correlation/Data Mining—In the future the need for prediction will become even more important. The use of semi 
and unstructured data sources and unsupervised data mining will become necessary. Nonetheless, a high level of process 
knowledge will still be required. 
Wafer Defect Metrology—Defect metrology continues to be important towards smaller nodes, especially considering new 
yield challenges like multiple patterning. The main way to detect yield impacting defects in production is defect inspection. 
Therefore, the requirements are defined together with the More Moore chapter.  
Heterogenous Integration—3D integration is the challenge. Finding the right solutions for those inspection requirements 
will be the focus for future roadmap development.  
Yield Management for MEMS—MEMS technology holds specific challenges for inspection and characterization based on 
structures at backside, capwafers, and a need of inspection and characterization of covered defects. The different MEMS 

Introduction  3 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
technologies need to be separated in surface and bulk technologies for it causes different requirements to inspection and 
characterization. 
Yield Management for Packaging and Assembly—As technology requirements in the assembly and packaging area 
increases, yield loss, and therefore yield improvement methodologies, become essential. Yet the most appropriate 
methodologies have to be selected and Front End (FE) yield tools need to be adapted to Back End (BE) requirements. This 
is a future opportunity to define a dedicated roadmap addressing Back End requirements.  
Critical Surface Environment Control includes the ambient space around the wafer, lithography optics, lithography masks, 
and other critical substrates at all times. This includes tool environment consideration, cleanroom air, as well as storage of 
wafers in front opening unified pods (FOUPs). As the list of ambient contaminants to be controlled broadens, so must 
measurement capabilities. Affordable, accurate, repeatable, high capture rate, real-time monitoring equipment for non-
particulate contamination are becoming increasingly necessary. The use of inert environments to transport, store, and even 
process wafers is expected to increase with process sensitivities. Pre-gate, pre-contact clean, salicidation, exposed copper, 
and reticle exposure are cited as processes that first require this capability. In addition, using inert environments offers the 
opportunity to reduce the introduction of moisture into vacuum load-lock tools, thereby decreasing contamination and load-
lock pump-down times. Drier environments can contribute to static charging, so this needs to be considered. While closed-
carrier purging systems currently exist, and wet-processing tool environments are evolving into enclosed, low-O2 single 
wafer processing chambers may need to become inert, such as needed wet-sink end-stations present a challenge. Safety 
when using inert purges must be carefully considered, including during maintenance. As wafer isolation technologies 
evolve, design and material selection of carriers and enclosures will be critical for performance in isolating the wafers from 
the ambient and in not contributing contaminants themselves. In addition, the materials and designs must not promote cross-
contamination between processes. Seal technology, low-outgassing, and non-absorbing material development are key to an 
effective wafer and reticle isolation deployment. 
There are three primary sources of process environment contamination. One is the impurities in the process materials as 
supplied. The second is the delivery system or the process itself. The third is reaction, such as contaminant- or thermally 
induced decomposition, by process such as reactive ion etch (RIE) contamination of FOUPs. These contamination sources 
are found throughout the pathway from the delivered gas or chemical to the substrate surface.  
Current state of technology suggests significant gaps in contamination measurement capability. Complexity of the advanced 
semiconductor devices and continual geometrical scaling led to the situation when killer particle size became much smaller 
than capability of the most advanced metrology to detect those particles. This situation has been true in UPW (ultrapure 
water) for nearly a decade, with particle metrology providers investing into closing the gap, while the gap has been only 
increasing. Current definition of the killer size of the particles is based on half of critical dimension in logic devices.  
As the result, the risk is considered high to continue monitoring particles of the sizes much larger than the killer size in the 
attempt of killer particles control. What makes the situation even more problematic are the following factors: 
1. Most advanced particles filtration in UPW has reached its limits to control killer particles (the killer particles are 
significantly smaller than the smallest filter pore sizes). 
2. There are indications that high purity materials shed significant number of particles at current killer sizes or larger. 
3. There is a concern that high molecular weight polymers may form killer size particle when they attach to the wafer 
and the water dries out. 
It should be noted that particle control in UPW and liquid chemicals is not the only parameter that requires proactive 
approach. Particles are more critical than other types of contaminants, leading to yield and reliability problems and therefore 
used in this paper to illustrate the approach. 
1.1. RELIABILITY – EMERGING TECHNOLOGY DRIVER FOR CONTAMINATION CONTROL 
The Yield Enhancement (YE) chapter of the IRDS has been engaged in extensive collaboration with the More Moore (MM) 
chapter to ensure that the risk of reliability becomes a critical driver and focus in the development of the IRDS roadmap in 
2021 and beyond.  The importance of reliability is becoming more critical due to the changes in device development and 
complexity of application.  
Today’s complex applications require dramatic enhancements in communications and networking capabilities as well as 
real time human computer interfaces. Examples of this include intelligent edge devices such as augmented reality glasses, 
autonomous cars and navigation systems that collect, communicate, generate, and analyze data in real-time.  These systems 
require the device to continuously process algorithms 24/7 either directly on the device or on a server that is near the device. 
This results in stringent workload profiles for the device, which if not properly managed, could lead to deterioration over 

4  Introduction 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
time. The life expectancy of the device depends on its application or use, for instance a consumer electronic device, or smart 
phone may have an acceptable life span of 2 – 5 years and simply be replaced with a new model, where high-performance 
servers require a lifespan between 5 and 10 years before the datacenter expects to replace it (Figure-YE-2). This is further 
amplified with increased temperature because of shrinking feature sizes and 3D integration partitioning targeting high-
density memory on logic. Regarding integration, many processes rely on highly conformal thin films constituted by new 
materials on high-aspect ratio and tight-pitch 3D structures. These three trends, namely stringent mission profiles, increased 
power density, and shrinking feature sizes on 3D structures, necessitate a focus on identifying roadmap for Yield 
Enhancement to enable adequate reliability. 
 
Figure YE-2   Expected lifetime of chips in years. 
Source: https://semiengineering.com/making-chips-to-last-their-lifetime/, October 2020 
 
The most important modules for reliability are gate stack integrity, interconnect, and source/drain engineering. Bias 
temperature instability (BTI) in the gate stack, via-bottom voids in the interconnect, and source/drain EPI are also important 
concerns of reliability degradation in More Moore technologies. These are mostly induced by the initial defect density on 
the interfaces, which does not cause any electrical signature during wafer sort test but further enhanced during its operation 
by increased electrical field and/or diffusion of those defects causing shifts in device behavior, further leading to permanent 
device failure. BTI failure manifests itself by unacceptable threshold voltage shift causing irrecoverable timing failure 
causing functional failure, via void causing current crowding leading to blow of via, and source/drain EPI causing time-
dependent-di-electric-breakdown (TDDB) of di-electric between the gate and source/drain and/or an increase of tunneling 
current at the junctions.  BTI in the gate stack is a more critical one because of inspection difficulties for the quality check 
of the gate stack as well as the very small thickness of di-electric stack (down to 2nm). Typical sources of contamination 
are from airborne sources and ultrapure water used in last cleaning steps of the Si channel before oxide and high-k di-
electric (e.g. HfO2) deposition.  
The images below illustrate the defect formation mechanisms. 

Introduction  5 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
 
 
Figure YE-3   Reliability Failure Mechanisms  
Source: Based on communication with MM and reference to G. Klimeck (Purdue, ECE606: Solid State Devices). 
 
Since an impact on reliability is expected to be caused by changes in the properties of the very thin films, it is understood 
that such defects would be inflicted by molecules and ions, as opposed to particles. Detailed knowledge of the 
manufacturing process steps, material reliability, and lifetime requirements are needed to determine defects that impact or 
will impact performance of the device during its lifetime. YE in collaboration with MM is currently working on 
deconstructing the risks and quantifying the contamination limits for the roadmap. MM has developed the model (shown 
in Figure YE-4) that illustrates reliability projections that will be used to define the target limits along with other 
publications and supporting literature. 
Figure YE-4 shows initial defect density causing a potential BTI failure at 10% shift threshold. Defect density numbers 
shown in the figure correspond to the critical area (e.g. active) of device, but not across the whole wafer. Wafer-level defect 
densities will be similar, since the effective active footprint is 3x the planar footprint, which is depreciated by the gate 
length being 1/3rd of the contacted gate pitch.  
 
 
Figure YE-4   Tolerable defect density in finFET (2022) and GAA (2025) for 10-year field operation. 
Source: More Moore, IRDS, 2021  
 
Collaboration between Yield and MM teams will continue into 2022 to also address the defectivity issues impacting yield. 
 

6  Introduction 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
“Proactive approach” in the IRDS target parameters 
As the result of the above deficiencies, the YE chapter of IRDS has changed its direction from Reactive to Proactive Yield 
management in the cases where the previous approach cannot work. New IRDS parameters were added to the roadmap 
targets. This approach assumes no ability to monitor defect related parameters due to insufficient capability of the existing 
metrology. For example, when it is impossible to monitor killer particles in UPW and liquid chemicals, IRDS focuses on 
particle occurrence prevention by both reducing particle challenge to the final filters as well as ensuring enhanced 
performance of the filters. The new Proactive parameter added to the roadmap is shifting monitoring to the point in the 
treatment system where particle detection is feasible and meaningful, leveraging power-law correlation factor. At this 
location, the particle size distribution is not affected by filtration, the size distribution is typically normal, and power law 
correlation can be used to project the level of contamination to the target particle size. Knowing the efficiency of the final 
and point-of-use (POU) filters, relationship between the particle challenge to the filters and the level of particles at POE 
can be established.  
In contrast with reactive approach, dependent on the measurement at the target point, proactive approach is focused on what 
is measurable and drives continuous improvement ignoring metrology deficiencies. Proactive approach also focuses on 
proactive risk analysis as opposed to corrective actions following reported yield excursions. This is particularly important 
in applications of semiconductor devices where reliability is critical. 
Target particle size. The following image illustrates the level of discussion between YE IFT and the device experts (More 
Moore IFT) that helps to deconstruct the sensitivity of the device to particle related defects and determine the killer size of 
the particle, as defined in Table YE-3. 
Target particle density. In addition to the killer particle size above, it is important to determine the target level of the 
defect density distribution of each layer, which meets required product yield which consists of every layer yield IRDS More 
Moore defines. This targeted defect density distribution is estimated using typical key parameters (such as k and q) in Yield 
projection formula. Yield calculation model below is an example that was referred from More Moore published method 
and agreed between Yield Enhancement and More Moore chapters of the IRDS. 

Introduction  7 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
 
Source – IRDS More Moore IFT 
Dx—defect density value in the units of the number of defects per 300 mm wafer, based on the device complexity and defect 
characteristics for the given layer of the device manufacturing. 
Figure YE-5   Defect Density Calculation 
This calculation is based on well-known critical area-based yield forecasting model above published by More Moore IRDS 
Team which calculates critical area for each layer. The critical layers have different sensitivity to different type and sizes 
of the particles due to complexity, critical area distribution which is dependent on pattern design, and device critical 
dimensions. 
1.1.1. ULTRAPURE WATER 
Ultrapure water (UPW) is purified water with most of the quality parameters below or near the detection limits of the most 
advanced metrology. Current state of UPW technology generally can provide effective control of contamination. However, 
whereas some parameters are relatively easy to control, the effect of others requires further investigation. Recent 
development of the defectivity definitions suggests that some of the contaminants, such as particles, are going to affect 
yield, whereas others, such as non-particulate, may not affect yield but may impact reliability (see Section 1.1). There is 
ongoing effort to characterize the risk to reliability that has not been included in the 2022 roadmap. 
Particle levels in UPW are reduced using the best available ultra-filtration (UF) technology, but today’s particle detection 
and counting technology is not able to keep up with the fast-growing requirements for “killer” particle control due to 
continued scaling of critical semiconductor devices. Monitoring available for particles is limited to laser particle counters 
capable of monitoring 20nm particles with limited counting efficiency. There are new measurement devices for smaller 
particle sizes under development and commercialization, but their capabilities have not been fully demonstrated yet. 
In recent years, the YE IRDS team together with the SEMI Standards organization developed a series of standards providing 
tools and methodologies to implement proactive particles control in advanced semiconductor facilities. Figure YE-6 
indicates the numbers of the UPW SEMI Standards supporting the effort. SEMI F104 is the method for testing critical 
components for particles. SEMI C79 drives filter performance by measuring ability of the filters to remove particles down 

8  Introduction 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
to 4-nm size and ensuring low particle shedding by the filters. Ion exchange resin was found to be a major potential 
contributor of small particles. SEMI C93 measures contamination shedding by ion exchange resin. 
Lack of proven particle metrology limits the ability to confirm whether UF is effective in controlling particles down to the 
critical particle size. At the same time, it is apparent that the killer size of the particles has approached filtration capability 
of the most advanced final filters. Furthermore, there is test data suggesting the particle challenge concentrations in the feed 
to the final filters from UPW system components can be very high. Current definition of the killer size of the particles is 
based on half-pitch logic and is as small as 3.5 nm for the most critical electrically active particles (EAP). To address the 
metrology gaps and particle contamination risks, a new approach has been proposed. The details are described in the white 
paper “Proactive Particle Control in Ultrapure Water (UPW) in Silicon Wafer Cleaning Process, IRDS, 2022”. New 
“Proactive” UPW IRDS parameters have been added to the Table YE-3. This approach assumes no ability to monitor killer 
particles in UPW, but instead focuses on particle occurrence prevention by both reducing particle challenge to the UPW 
final filters as well as ensuring adequate performance of the filters. Figure YE-6 illustrates application of the proactive 
approach in UPW, relying on SEMI standards and the supply chain to deliver solutions based on use of those standards. 
Particle precursors. This is a new parameter added to UPW roadmap in 2021. It was demonstrated that presence of high 
molecular weight organics may result in residue formation of the wafer, similar to particle of a size of approximately 8 nm 
and larger. The semiconductor industry is entering a region where dimensions of particles, particle precursors and molecules 
in liquids, begin to overlap.  A particle precursor is defined as a dissolved molecular compound, which may form particles 
on the wafer. The ability to distinguish particle precursors from solid particles in UPW is becoming critical. While advanced 
filtration can remove nanometer sized solid particles, the same filter may have little or no ability to remove particle 
precursors. Experimental work has been conducted to determine relationships between the particle precursor concentration 
measured in UPW and the defect density formation on the wafer.  
 
 
Figure YE-6   Proactive Particle Control 
The conclusions of the experimental work are provided below. For more details, please refer to the Particle White Paper 
linked to this report. 
1. Conducted series of the experimental work suggest that the particle risk originating from precursors is real. All 
experiments conducted thus far indicate particle formation from all precursor materials tested. 
• 
The challenge solution used in the experiment involving IX resin leach-out, represents >1 order of 
magnitude higher concentration of such contamination than that of typical UPW. This produced >1000 
particle per wafer on the surface of the sizes 10nm and larger, vs. concentration of at least 1E+7/ml as 
detected in solution by Liquid Nanoparticle Sizer (LNS). This means that in order to achieve the level 

Introduction  9 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
of particles per Figure YE-7) of <5/wafer, the level of such precursors in UPW should be non-detect by 
Scanning Threshold Particle Counter (sTPC) (online version of LNS). sTPC DL is ~1E+5/ml. 
2. This experimental work indicates that current ultrafiltration technology is not fully effective in mitigating ion 
exchange resin particle precursor passage.  Continued improvements in the UPW final filtration technology is 
needed. 
3. Different types of organic polymers that may occur in UPW may lead to different defect types and densities. And 
although mixed ion exchange leach-outs are used for quantification of the target precursor contamination level 
(due to the high probability of occurrence of such material), proactive minimization of all particle precursors is 
needed to support yield targets of the advanced existing and next generations of semiconductor technology. 
• 
Anion IX resin had much stronger affinity to the wafer surface vs. cation exchange resin, whereas 
mixed resin appears to produce lower contamination level than the two. 
• 
Synthetic polymer used in the 1st round of testing showed even higher tendency to adsorption and 
agglomeration of the formed particles. 
• 
The data indicate high potential of particle agglomeration, further increasing the risk to Yield.  
4. The ratio of 3,300 LNS particles/ml forming one particle per 300mm wafer was chosen to calculate the allowed 
(target) level of UPW precursor contamination measured by LNS (or similar instrument based on 
nebulization/condensation particle counting technology). Referring to Figure YE-7, below suggesting that 
particles of the size of 7-10 nm range must be controlled at the level of less than 5 particles per wafer, the target 
level of the particle precursor (by LNS) is ~20,000 particles/ml (rounded up).  
5. Measurement of the particles precursors still needs to be standardized to ensure high quality detection. New 
SEMI standard development is underway. It is recommended that metrology combining 
nebulization/condensation is used for the analysis, given the capability of the measurements observed in all 
conducted by IRDS experiments in the period of 2019-2021. However, no specific organic compound was found 
to be representative and helpful for conducting calibration/verification studies. More work still needs to be done 
to develop such standard. 
 
Figure YE-7   UPW Roadmap Particle Development 
  
Silica is one of more complex impurities in UPW. Silica may occur in UPW in a form of reactive (dissolved ionic) or 
colloidal silica. The main concern around colloidal silica is that its occurrence in UPW is highly probable, its retention by 
final filters is more difficult than other particles, and also because it may adsorb metal ions, thus becoming more detrimental 
on the wafer (these effects are based on published data). Recent data on particle precursors triggers additional concern of 
formation of high molecular weight polymeric dissolved silica (likely to be formed in the ion exchange media).  
While it is easy to control reactive silica (within defined sensitivities of metrology), colloidal (including polymeric) silica 
is difficult to monitor at the level where it presents a problem. Traditionally colloidal silica has been measured as the delta 
between total and reactive silica in UPW. The killer particle size of currently considered generations has become very small, 
making it impractical to expect that the colloidal silica particles in critical concentration (posing risk to critical surface) 
could be measured as the delta of total and reactive silica, i.e., very small particles do not contain sufficient measurable 
amount of the silica compound. Since colloidal silica cannot be effectively monitored using state-of-the-art metrology as 
the compound, further consideration of colloidal silica will be done as part of particles monitoring. Given the criticality of 
this parameter, it is recommended to consider taking mitigation steps to prevent colloidal silica occurrence via improved 
treatment process control and use of higher purity materials.  
Polish resin was demonstrated to have very little capacity to retain silica, while colloidal silica may be formed inside of the 
Polish beds from traces of reactive silica. This point is addressed in the roadmap (see Table YE-3) by adding a “proactive” 

10  Introduction 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
silica control parameter in the feed to UPW tank. Pushing silica control upstream to the treatment process helps to reduce 
silica loads to the Polish loop. 
Hydrogen peroxide has been reported to occur in final UPW as a by-product of 185 nm UV (ultraviolet) reactors used to 
decompose UPW organics. There are technologies available for removal of hydrogen peroxide in UPW; however, their 
implementation requires major system change and substantial investment. The UPW Roadmap defined H2O2 target at 3 
ppb. This is based on the data suggesting that 10 ppb of H2O2 in UPW in pre-Epi cleans may affect wafer surface roughness. 
It is still unclear if a 3-ppb level may have similar detrimental effects. Additional study is needed to verify this concern. In 
the meantime, this target should allow for reducing H2O2 level, while possibly avoiding any major capital investments 
necessary to reach lower peroxide levels. 
Metallic contamination in UPW is another important concern. Although metal control in UPW has never been a difficult 
challenge from the treatment process point of view, new technology drivers may put the entire technology supply chain in 
front of such challenges in the near future. Based on literature data “extremely low level of metal contamination is required 
for specific devices like CMOS image sensors”. There are suggestions that some of the metals for such applications should 
be controlled at the level of two or even three orders of magnitude below the levels typically specified in most UPW systems.  
The supplemental white paper for this chapter titled “Metal Contamination of Image sensors by Ultrapure Water in Silicon 
Wafer Cleaning Process” (link is given in the Appendix) provides details of the literature data as well as how new specific 
metal targets (see Table YE-3) for UPW have been calculated for image sensors metal control. The ability to control some 
of the metals in UPW by current state-of-the-art treatment technology to such low levels may not be possible. This includes 
limitations of metrology and treatment technology, as well as materials purity of the critical components use in UPW Polish 
and delivery systems. For this reason, an additional parameter for proactive metal contamination control was added in the 
feed to the UPW tank.  
Organic contamination is currently measured in terms of its total organic carbon content (TOC). This measurement of the 
organic content does not account for the types of organic comprising TOC; how it may react with various wafer surfaces, 
or how the reaction may impact device yield. While for most applications’ organic compounds in UPW are categorized as 
critical and non-critical based on their boiling point, immersion lithography lens hazing is driven by factors besides boiling 
point. Although controlling organics at the target levels is difficult, both treatment and sensitive metrology solutions are 
available. 
There is indication that residual amounts of TOC (less than 500 ppt) may be present as nm-size organic particles that can 
penetrate even the smallest pore size filter.  
Note: It is important to keep in mind that the SECC roadmap is focused on technology enablers, identifying the parameters 
that require new technologies for monitoring and control. For the practical purposes of UPW system design and operation, 
SEMI F631 and SEMI F612 provide guidance that can be used as a reference specification for the UPW quality, design, 
and operation of advanced semiconductor processes, considering feasibility of the existing technologies. The UPW IRDS 
team collaborates closely with the SEMI UPW Task Force to develop guides and test methods to mitigate existing risks and 
challenges. 
1.1.2. AIRBORNE MOLECULAR CONTAMINATION 
Airborne Molecular Contamination (AMC) first became an issue with the introduction of chemically amplified resists in 
the 1990s.3 
A defect occurred once the photolytically initiated acids within the resist were neutralized by airborne ammonia from 
cleanroom air. This interaction is device defect relevant as it deteriorates line width and line structures. 
More defect patterns with a strong relation to AMC root causes have been identified over the decades. Often AMC problems 
arose from revolutionary steps in manufacturing technology necessary to drive ahead More Moore feature shrinking or 
wafer throughput. 
One example is the rapidly increasing formation of microcrystal contamination on masks and lenses from sulfurous AMC, 
such as sulfur dioxide that was photolytically activated by the 193 nm laser wavelength in ArF scanners. Another example 
is unwanted residues of strong acids, such as HF and HCl from dry etch processes attached to wafer surfaces, once FOUPs 
became the dominant technology for wafer transport and storage. 
 
1 SEMI F063. Guide For Ultrapure Water Used In Semiconductor Processing 
2 SEMI F061. Guide To Design And Operation Of A Semiconductor Ultrapure Water System 

Introduction  11 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
Technical solutions have since been developed to minimize the above cited defects and are available in production. However 
these solutions have been found in a “reactive way”. Their exploration has been driven by yield losses that were already 
impacting high volume manufacturing at the time any preventive solution was addressed. 
The AMC section of the YE chapter is edited to formulate a more proactive approach and advance contamination control. 
The goal is to trigger research and close potential technology gaps in AMC control for the most defect-critical process steps 
of the next generation devices. For AMC, past experience shows that this could either be systematic and road blocking 
impacts, or random and event driven impacts. Yet they are both yield relevant. 
For the IRDS YE AMC chapter, the team points out that effects, defects and technological solutions must not necessarily 
be feature size (line width) related. Device defects also often occur related to the introduction of new materials, metals or 
processes. Consequently, a more proactive approach is needed to prevent the occurrence of major impact on transfers of 
technology from development to high volume production. 
The continuous development of the AMC roadmap in the YE chapter will be based on an ongoing exchange with experts 
from “More Moore” and “More than Moore” defectivity modelling and process integration. The assessment of the impact 
to the product includes the aspects of yield (% good dyes) as well as the aspect of device reliability (lifetime before failure). 
The most critical AMC related defects to next generation devices are identified and included in Table YE3, together with 
the AMC concentration limit information, as soon as they are available from research or experimental work. Citation of 
critical AMC and the limits is strictly related to the direct wafer environment contamination control (WECC) at the point 
where AMC (airborne molecular contamination) transfers into SMC (surface molecular contamination). AMC 
concentration limits are carefully evaluated and curated together with the typical expected time of impact to the sensitive 
wafer step. It can be shown that most AMC effects and defects are predominantly dose related (where dose = concentration 
x time of impact). Indications of the time of impact related to the AMC limit are included in Table YE3. 
The 2021 edition for the YE AMC section deals with documented or expected device defects manufactured in high-aspect 
FIN technology or GAA (gate all around) technology. 
Requirements for wafer contamination control have been identified for gate oxide formation (gate oxide pre-clean), source 
drain contact module (trench etch & epi) and metallization (specifically copper metallization, via bottom filling). The entries 
to Table YE3 have been updated and now detail specific AMC with a high device damage potential and exclude those 
explicitly for which no concern prevail. With the review and focus to the most vulnerable process steps  these could be 
named now and replaced former generic entries in Table YE3 as FEOL (front end of line), MEOL (Middle of line) and 
BEOL (back end of line). 
It is recognized that further tight control of the wafer environmental conditions in FOUPs is mandatory to prevent AMC 
conversion into SMC and subsequent defects, e.g., in metallization. This control involves more specific monitoring of 
critical AMC in FOUPs at short cycle times as well as efficient purge and clean technologies. The deteriorating effect to 
wafer surfaces spans all AMC classes. The group of experts identified a technology gap in the availability of fast and reliable 
on-line monitoring technology to unambiguously quantify small levels of high-impact AMC. Once AMC can be quantified, 
technological solutions to prevent the impact of such AMC can be formulated. 
The availability of time resolving and compound resolving AMC monitoring technologies is a current need and field of 
research as  concentration totals for AMC classes have been identified to be less useful and could be misleading. Totals can 
both be masking the importance of individual, high-impact compounds and/or driving AMC control setups into non-
effective positions along the process chain at unnecessary, high cost. 
As the AMC chapter for 2021 was restructured and focused to device critical defects, the group acknowledges that there 
are fields of applications of AMC control which remain important but for which mature technological solutions exist. Such 
applications are, for example, the environmental cleanroom control of AMC in lithography zones to safely operate UV 
exposure tools. The AMC control limits for those tools are typically provided by the OEM device manufacturers.  
The environmental cleanroom specifications span the entire range from acidic, basic AMC to condensable organics and Si-
containing compounds, but also compounds such as reduced sulfur and ozone that have been added in recent years. Control 
of such compound typically calls for concentration limits in the single digit parts per billion (ppbv 10-9 moles per mole) 
range, and it is required to maintain operation of the optical systems in the interior of the tools. Beyond UV exposure tools, 
this also applies more and more to inspection tools with high energy light applications. The tool-based AMC control for 
inspection equipment is typically not yet at the advanced level of UV exposure tools. Consequently, it is recommended to 
keep control of AMC at the cleanroom location, specifically for acid and base contamination, at the level of 1 – 2 ppbv. 
Alternatively, tool-based solutions can be applied that guarantee for these levels at the point of entry to the tool interior. 

12  Introduction 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
Furthermore, general AMC control limits exist, e.g., for cleanroom make-up air and cleanroom recirculation air. However, 
limits to support contamination control are highly dependent on the individual “shell” approach of the IDM and the location 
- from the outer environment to the wafer environment - and a generalized tabulation of standardized limits is less 
meaningful. In this context, the way to achieve the appropriate AMC control limit at wafer point of entry is an engineering 
and facility effort and allows – besides good practice considerations – many degrees of freedom. Consequently, cleanroom 
concentration limits were removed from Table YE3. The IRDS YE experts encourage managers responsible for cleanrooms 
to consult in-house and external expertise on appropriate concepts. For any such concepts, the occurrence of short term or 
event driven AMC excursions in cleanroom environments should be included in these considerations. 
AMC on-line monitoring (selectivity, time-resolution, applicability) 
AMC control deals with prevention of AMC release, impact and recirculation, for all of which a tight source control or 
mitigation is mandatory. To determine accurate AMC concentrations, there is clearly a need for better AMC monitoring 
instrumentation in the cleanroom and the wafer environment to determine AMC from the parts per billion (10-9) to the part 
per trillion level (10-12; by volume) in real time. Ion mobility spectrometry techniques (IMS), cavity ring-down spectroscopy 
(CRDS), Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR), ultraviolet (UV) fluorescence and chemiluminescence instruments and various 
atmospheric pressure ionized mass spectroscopy (APIMS) have been used to measure low level AMC. Most of these 
technologies are either too unspecific (IMS), too involved or they lack a sufficient level of sensitivity and portability. A 
larger variety of online methods and instrumentation is still needed.  Industrialized technology currently lags behind actual 
technology needs. The main challenge is to combine high sensitivity with high specificity at manageable cost, maintenance, 
portability and automated operation. Witness wafers have been used to link surface molecular contaminant (SMC) 
concentrations to specific defects. The surface concentrations are usually expressed in a maximum allowable number of 
molecules/cm2, ions/cm2, or atoms/cm2 for elements or ng/cm2 for organics. Witness wafers are capable methods, but they 
are run offline at small scale. 
Supplemental information about on-line monitoring methods is found in the Appendix of this chapter on Table YE4 and 
YE4a for AMC monitoring programs. The evaluation of the technical demands for on-line monitoring technologies and 
their communication to potential suppliers will be a focus item for IRDS YE AMC over the next years. 
1.1.3. GASES, LIQUID CHEMICALS, AND PRECURSORS 
The targeted purity levels can be reached either by bulk delivery of a fluid with required purity or through use of local 
purification/filtration step. Care should be taken, at a minimum, to maintain the quality of the gas and chemicals coming 
from the source, ensuring that contamination is not added downstream, as may occur due to particle generation at 
components (such as valve switching), moisture outgassing, byproduct generation due to incompatible materials, etc. 
Particle filtration as close to the point of use (POU) or chamber entrance as possible is generally advisable for gases. For 
the most critical applications a local purifier may be used to enhance or ensure ultimate purity at the POU. In those cases, 
the prevailing approach is to seek levels that are adequate for the process and to view the purifier as “insurance.” The 
challenge to the purifier is minimal, and long purifier lifetimes can normally be expected.  
An important exception to this guidance is for some specialty materials that undergo a variation in composition as they are 
distilled from the cylinder or other delivery vessel in a bulk vapor delivery set up. For example, anhydrous HCl is known 
to form very stable hydrates with water that result in changes in the concentration in the water content in the cylinder and 
gas phase as the original specified contents are removed. In this case, a combination of rigid specifications on how much 
of the contents can be used before moisture becomes unacceptable requiring application of moisture removal devices is 
needed in the vapor transport path. Liquid anhydrous ammonia is another specialty gas with this potential issue. Within the 
realm of relatively volatile liquids that are delivered in bulk, i.e., not by direct liquid injection, volatilization, aqueous 
hydrogen peroxide, aqueous ammonia, and likely many of the amine-amide based chemical vapor deposition/atomic layer 
deposition (CVD/ALD) precursors, are expected to undergo similar distillative variation and/or thermal degradation under 
delivery conditions. Depending upon the process sensitivity this might be a source of poor film quality or process variability 
that can be addressed by attention to the delivery method. Reactivity of transport surfaces, impact of aging of bulk/spec 
gases within the delivery system, impact of perturbation of gases during transport as well as outgassing need to be 
considered, as well. 
Point of use purifiers and filtration units are finding application in newer ALD techniques, for example, where the films are 
deposited as monolayer and incorporated impurities can be especially destructive. Purifiers must not add any new 
contaminants. A near- and medium-term challenge is filtration of the precursor vapor. The sources can be sublimable solids 
or readily condensable vapors of low volatility liquids. These can re-solidify or re-liquefy causing plugging and instability 
in fluid transfer to the substrate surface.  

Introduction  13 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
1.1.3.1. BULK AND SPECIALTY GASES 
Increased levels of purity requirements are expected in advanced processes. This type of improvement might be anticipated, 
based upon historical trends as design rules tightened, but there is again little objective evidence to support the need for 
improvements across the range of bulk gases. For very special applications where extraordinarily higher purities are critical, 
special purity grades or additional purification will be required.  
The situation is similar for many of the specialty gases. Statistical process control (SPC), such as 3-sigma limits for process 
gases and liquids was implemented by most semiconductor manufacturer for critical process fluids, e.g., TEOS.   
The promise of providing “in control” process fluids is anticipated to improve process yields by either minimizing the 
overall variability of the manufacturing process or in simply reducing the likelihood of a process crash resulting from large 
variations in material quality that would still nominally have met a more standard specification. 
For some processes, such as advanced lithography (especially 193 nm and EUV), very small quantities of “high molecular 
weight/high boiling point” (e.g., C6-C30) hydrocarbons in supply gases are detrimental because of a tendency to adhere to 
the exposed surfaces, and potential for photochemical degradation to leave non-volatile residues that impact optical 
characteristics on lenses, masks, mirrors, etc. However, any organics, even ones with lower molecular mass than C6-organic 
compounds are considered detrimental if they result in refractory deposits. For the same reason, other potential impurities 
such as siloxanes or organophosphates can also be very detrimental in extremely small quantities. In order to detect such 
species, e.g. siloxanes and organophosphates with sufficient sensitivity, it is necessary to directly detect the relevant species 
and calibrate the analyzer with the appropriate standard near the quantitation limit. The methods used are analogous to those 
for AMC, such as thermal desorption (TD) gas chromatography (GC), mass spectrometry (MS) or TD GC with flame 
ionization detector (FID), photo ionization detector (PID), or ion mobility spectrometry (IMS).  
New developments include reaction steps and time-of-flight (TOF) measurements. These approaches may still miss some 
heavier hydrocarbons and/or polar species that tend to remain in the column or emerge as very broad peaks, if not optimized. 
For methods using adsorbent traps, it is very important to determine the trap efficiency, which are used as sampling 
techniques. Using atmospheric pressure ionized mass spectroscopy (APIMS) to provide real-time measurement of 
individual hydrocarbons is possible in principle, but very involved and calibration is difficult, because larger hydrocarbons 
may be collisionally dissociated in the ionization process.  
An approach that has gained some acceptance is to use TD GC/MS and sum all peaks corresponding to C6 and higher. The 
instrument is usually calibrated with a multi-component standard and results are reported as “toluene” or “hexadecane” for 
wafers or as toluene for clean dry air (CDA) or gases. While the quantization provided by this method is approximate, and 
some species may be overlooked, it does at least provide a metric for contamination level and a straightforward calibration.  
Historically, applications for both O2 and H2 generally tolerate higher levels of N2 contamination than other contaminants; 
however, H2 as a carrier for epitaxy now requires more stringent N2 levels and the table reflects this observation. 
Requirements for critical CDA with stricter control of organics and refractories, lithography purge gases, and supercritical 
CO2 supply are included. Whereas critical CDA may not always be conveniently or cheaply available, there is no 
technological barrier to its production. Analytical methods are usually the same as used for airborne molecular 
contamination in clean room air, such as bubbling through ultra-pure water (for metals, acids, amines, etc.) or trapping on 
an adsorbent trap for organics. In each case, the sampler concentrates impurities so that requisite sensitivities are achieved 
when the sample is introduced to the analyzer inductively coupled plasma - mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) or ion 
chromatography for aqueous samples, GC-MS for desorption of organics). Such methods are time consuming by nature, 
and direct methods would be preferred if available. However, there is no apparent pressing need for real-time analysis. For 
SO2 there are convenient online methods, e.g., UV fluorescence.  
For specialty gases, contaminant values in etchants, dopants, and deposition gases emphasize in Table YE-3 the increased 
number of different materials in use, and to better delineate the processes in which they are used. Particulate contamination 
is omitted since online monitoring of particle concentrations is not commonly practiced and the efficacy of POU particle 
filters is well established. Whereas there is evidence that the most demanding applications, such as low temperature epi and 
its cleaning gases, will continue to benefit from improvements in purity as deposition temperatures are lowered, this is 
expected to be reflected in wider use of the best available purity rather than substantial improvements of those levels 
indicated in the table, which reflects the most critical application. 
Tighter control over the variation in purity in both bulk and specialty gases is more important than improvement in absolute 
purity levels. However, the often more chemically reactive specialty gases present a more formidable challenge for 
maintaining of point of supply (POS) purity levels throughout the delivery to the point of process. Selected specialty gases, 
e.g., HCl are now commonly under statistical process control at the POS. 

14  Introduction 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
More detailed consideration of the impurity levels found in the growing number of novel materials used in processing will 
be increasingly important. Requisite purity levels for critical materials such as novel metal oxides, chemical mechanical 
planarization (CMP) slurries, low/high κ dielectric materials, precursor materials (used in CVD, ALD, and electroplating 
solutions) for barrier and conductor metals (such as Cu, Ta) have not been widely studied, and many of these materials have 
not been called out in Table YE-3. An early attempt to start to catalogue and characterize the properties of the thin film 
precursors utilized in semiconductor processing is found in the supplementary material for this chapter. 
Deposition precursors for thin film materials are often sensitive to moisture, air and high temperatures. Control over the 
delivery process from the POS to the reaction chamber is critical to high yielding performance. The use of very high purity 
carrier and purge gases in these systems is often required to prevent decomposition that can contribute detrimental molecular 
and particulate impurities. Traditionally bulk purifiers were used in the bulk gas delivery systems to remove particles and 
other homogeneous chemical contaminations like oxygen, or moisture present in the supply gases. However, with the 
development and commercial availability of POU purifiers, there is a strong interest from end users to utilize POU purifiers 
particularly for specialty gases needed for critical process steps with very critical level of contamination control. These 
point-of-use purifiers POU are highly effective to remove chemical contaminants to extreme low level (~ ppt), easy to use, 
easy to replace, with low cost-of-ownership. The capability of placing those POU purifiers very close to inlet of process 
chamber, assures least travel path (less contamination) for process gases after chemical purification and filtration. 
By analogy with the definition of UPW particle precursors, The IRDS YE Gas Team defines particle precursors as 
contaminants in the gas in molecular form may generate particles by reaction or agglomeration. 
1.1.4. LIQUID CHEMICALS 
Pre-diffusion cleaning and EUV mask blank cleaning requirements drive the most aggressive impurity levels. Liquid 
particle level requirements are expected to become tighter with each technology generation. These target values are derived 
from the purity requirements on a wafer as calculated by the surface preparation experts assuming a linear relationship 
between the concentration in the liquid and on the wafer. Particle counters are currently only capable of measuring down 
to 30-40 nanometers (nm) in liquid chemicals. By assuming a particle size distribution, it should be possible to infer particle 
concentrations to smaller particle sizes, but this will be influenced by the level of filtration utilized. Another measurement 
challenge for several chemicals is the differentiation between foreign particles, micelles and bubbles, which is currently not 
possible, although solutions can be degassed and/or pressurized to dissolve gases and bubbles into solution. The ability to 
differentiate between damaging foreign particles and intentionally created micelles is also important for any effort to impart 
filtration that is effective but does not interfere with the chemical functional properties.  
Liquid chemicals can be separated into the two main categories of “Functional Chemistry” and “Cleaning Chemistry”. 
Functional Chemistry is used to modify the wafer surface by removing material (Etch, CMP) or depositing a new film onto 
the surface (plating, coating). Whereas, Cleaning Chemistry is used to remove contaminates from any previous processing 
step or modify the surface charge of the wafer surface to facilitate particle removal. This distinction is important to 
understand what is important in controlling the quality of the chemistry to minimize the defect contribution from it. For 
Functional Chemistry, assay control is key to the process in making sure the proper amount intended material is removed 
without removing material not intended. Either situation will result in a feature on the wafer surface that is measured by 
any subsequent defect metrology inspection step as a defect. For Cleaning Chemistry, the controls for preventing any foreign 
material or unintentional compounds in the chemistry is key to ensuring the ability to remove surface defects without 
contributing to additional ones.  
For this reason, the two categories were specifically listed out in the Liquid Chemicals section of the tables so that 
appropriate requirements can be considered and specified based on their application in the manufacturing process. The 
"Cleaning Chemistry" (or "critical cleans") will have a longer list of parameters and much more restrictive limits as 
compared to their "Functional Chemistry" counterpart. For example, HF cleaning chemistries may have less restrictions on 
contamination type parameters as compared to HF being used as an etchant. Conversely, HF etchant may be more restrictive 
on assay variance than its counterpart for use as a cleaner. Often many chemical cleaners are blended with other chemistries 
or diluted with water, which further highlights the need for strict controls on all of the constituents used in these blends to 
maintain contamination levels where they need to be to protect wafer yield. This is also why new categories were created 
to include proprietary chemistries and etchants to incorporate the diverse products in use that are provided by chemical 
suppliers or are blended at the IDM site. The number of these proprietary chemistries is growing such that they have become 
more dominant in number as compared to the general and historical standard list of processing chemistries, and do require 
some level of guidance for maintaining quality control. 
As the need for precise photolithography process control continues to become more critical, the quality control for the 
associated process chemistries also needs to more restrictive. With the proliferation with EUV in various process nodes 

Introduction  15 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
the need for more consistent developers of high quality is necessary. As a result, placeholder sections have been added to 
signify the ongoing characterization and future development of established quality criteria for these emerging 
technologies.   
The ability to accurately analyze organic, anion, and cation contamination in process chemicals is becoming more critical 
to successful wafer processing. With the increased use of CMP and plating chemicals, there is critical need for a better 
understanding of purity requirements for the delivered chemicals that takes into account the wide variety of ingredients 
used to make them.  
The performance characteristics of many of the process chemicals that are used for etching, plating, CMP and cleaning 
depend heavily on the amount and type of foreign material present as well as the consistency from batch to batch that is 
used in the process. The integrated effects of variability in the performance of these chemistries will play a significant role 
in the defect control within the manufacturing process. The process flow is designed based on the premise that each process 
step is stable and repeatable. Any deviations from these integrated design parameters will most likely have adverse effects 
of other process steps in the process flow which includes wafer defect impacts.  
For the control of metal ions in liquid chemicals, the processing and control of these contaminants at the supplier (POS) is 
an important first step. However, with the exposure of the chemistry to the shipping containers and various process and 
delivery equipment before it reaches the wafer process (POP); additional purification steps may be warranted to maintain 
the necessary purity levels. These additional purification steps can occur at the distribution system (POD), connection point 
to the distribution system (POC), entry into the processing equipment (POE) or even inside the wafer processing tool itself 
(POU). The critical nature of the specific processing step should dictate whether that specific chemistry should have 
additional purification employed.  
The ability to detect, control, and protect the process from adverse defect conditions relies on both the sensitivity of liquid 
defect metrology to detect the critical size of particle but also in the ability for the various metrologies to have the same or 
similar response to a change in the population and size distribution of these particles. Too often particle distribution baseline 
shifts occur at the end user's detection point with no signal observed at the chemical source location. By the time the 
chemical distribution system has detected this change, it is too late to protect the manufacturing process from the impacts 
of this increased defect level. Furthermore, many defect elevations occur in the wafer process with no detectable shift in 
any of the online liquid particle counting systems due to a mismatch in the sensitivity of the liquid particle counting 
metrology and the wafer defect sensitivity. 
1.1.4.1. ALD/CVD PRECURSORS 
At recent nodes ALD processes have been adopted aggressively and that proliferation is expected to accelerate in the future. 
ALD processes will therefore constitute a growing subset of the processes used in high volume manufacturing (HVM) and 
some discussion of common/unique aspects of ALD processes with respect to SECC is warranted.  
For the clear majority of semiconductor processes, gaseous reactants are delivered to the processing chamber at atmospheric 
or super atmospheric pressures. However, for most ALD processes, the precursor is delivered at pressures typically in the 
range of 5 Torr to 100 Torr (667 Pa to 13.3 kPa) to the reactor, which is processing typically less than 1 Torr (133 Pa). To 
minimize precursor deposition/condensation within a delivery system, the equipment is typically heated to 100°C or greater. 
At such conditions, the gas flow through many of the delivery system sub-components is in the slip flow regime. In the slip 
flow regime, there is a non-zero boundary velocity at solid surfaces and a thinner boundary layer. This significantly alters 
both the fluid dynamics and heat transfer properties of the system. Additionally, ALD precursors can readily form particles 
in the precursor delivery system through both condensation and reaction with residual oxygen-containing species. With 
solid precursor sources, there is an added risk that source material particulate can be entrained by the carrier gas.  
Furthermore, metallic impurities in inorganic, metalorganic, organometallic or organometalloid precursors are typically 
orders of magnitude higher in concentration than in most non-metal containing gas streams and can be a source of metallic 
contamination in the resulting films. In addition, thermal decomposition of precursors on the wafer or in the gas phase can 
produce particles or provide another source of in-film contamination. Original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) and 
precursor suppliers should keep these complexities in mind when designing or modifying precursor delivery sub-
components and systems. Semiconductor manufacturers should consult with their suppliers if they are interested in re-
engineering or adapting their precursor delivery systems since changing the pressure drop or flow dynamics of a vapor 
delivery system for a sensitive precursor may have unintended negative consequences.  
Due to the low vapor pressure of many ALD precursors, the process canisters are usually kept at elevated temperature 
(>90°C) at the point of use in the tool gas box. Many ALD precursors will have a slow rate of decomposition at these 
temperatures and extra care should be taken to adjust the size of the on-board source canister to consume the source before 

16  Introduction 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
process deteriorating decomposition starts. In many cases smaller heated onboard source canister that is refilled by a bulk 
deliver system or a liquid injection system without tank are preferred solutions. 
When supplying the precursor from a bulk delivery system in the sub fab, extra care should be taken to avoid release of 
bubbles from the push gas into the liquid precursor. The bubbles are released due to the pressure drop going from the point 
of push gas insertion (sub fab) up to the tool. These bubbles will typically disturb the liquid flow controllers in the tool gas 
box or direct liquid injection systems resulting in a disturbed fluctuating delivery flow of precursor into the reaction chamber 
and possible particle generation in the injection system if the injection is over flown with precursor above it is optimal 
working conditions. 
Downstream of the ALD reactor, the relatively low vapor pressure ALD precursors and process by-products tend to 
condensate at the first point of temperature drop. Therefore, the pump stack and pressure control should be heated above 
the condensation temperature and all the way to preferably a cold trap that condensate the precursor in a controlled manner 
to avoid back streaming particles into the reactor. 
Finally, semiconductor manufacturers should conduct due diligence audits of any analytical methods or techniques used to 
screen precursor quality with the understanding that many of the possible errors made while analyzing the precursors (e.g. 
incomplete digestion, failing to account for sample matrix effects, etc.) can lead to results that under-report the true impurity 
level. Many manufacturers are adopting ship to control standards individually with their suppliers in order to minimize any 
precursor variation associated yield loss in their factories. 
1.1.5. CRITICAL COMPONENTS 
Critical Components are defined as the high-purity polymer materials used in the manufacture, storage and conveyance of 
process chemicals that are a liquid at room temperature and up to 85oC.  This includes UPW and the broad range of 
chemicals used in the semiconductor manufacturing process.  As such they should not contribute more than a certain portion 
of the allowed contamination per the individual liquid specifications.  Typically, it is based on “50%” of the concentration 
contributed by all the critical components making up the distribution system.  These polymeric materials are made by high 
temperature and high-pressure molding or extrusion.  It is critical that the starting materials (raw polymer pellets) be as 
clean and meet the same specification as the finished products (pipe or tubing or fitting or valve, etc.).  Gaskets and seals 
have not been included in the list to date.  This is primarily due to the extremely low surface area of exposure to the fluid.  
They are included in SEMI F57 for extractables.  There is no practical way to assess the particle contribution for gaskets 
and seals due to the requirement to have them included in a flowing system where it would be very difficult to determine 
what any particle source is. The component manufacturing process is mechanical and thermal in nature (i.e., there are no 
chemicals involved).  
Critical Components are essential to the delivery of clean chemicals to the wafer.  There is a large surface area exposure 
and there can be a long exposure time as well.  The knowledge of the end user’s challenges is essential in defining the 
material requirements.  The impact of particles, metals and organics on the wafer is the prime concern of the roadmap.  
Further as the particle size gets very small (<10 nm), the make-up of the “particle” becomes more difficult to determine.  
They are not hard, optically visible items anymore.  They will more likely be large organic molecules or amorphous silicon 
compounds that could agglomerate into a larger mass or individually end up as a defect on the wafer surface.  We have 
added a category called Non-Volatile Residue (NVR) which is defined as matter that remains on the wafer after a clean 
and/or rinse step.  It is likely that for Critical Components that these materials will be an organic compound from materials 
of construction.  There is the possibility of “new” contaminants (like organics that are particle precursors) that they may 
not be removed by the re-treatment system.   
In Critical Components we have added an alternate definition to the UPW definition for critical organics.  In the UPW 
section critical organics are actually particle precursors.    For Critical Components it will be related to compounds that 
have properties similar to cyclohexanone or cyclohexanol in terms of molecular weight and boiling point, (approximately 
99 molecular weight and about 160oC boiling point).  These organics are known to have an impact on wafer production 
and as such are considered critical organics.  These organics can remain on the wafer surface as a film or a splotch or can 
agglomerate into a particle.  There are now three different definitions of critical organics.  One each for UPW, HP chemicals 
and critical components.  For critical components there needs to be an assessment of what the effect of organics coming 
from critical components is on the wafer so we can actually establish both a definition of these and target concentrations 
for the roadmap.  This will be first for UPW and then for various classes of HP chemicals. 
The model developed by Mustafa Badaroglu in the More Moore chapter of the IRDS was used as the method to establish 
the permitted particle contribution from Critical Components.  This value for critical components is based on a percentage 
of the value calculated for UPW.  There are four different particle categories:  static and dynamic before the final filter and 

Introduction  17 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
static and dynamic post final filter.  Static components (like tubing or non-actuated valves) are allowed a smaller fraction 
of the UPW target than dynamic (components that actuate and move during use like an on-off final dispense valve).  There 
are values per actuation for dynamic components.  The particle targets for chemicals are the same as for UPW.   The post 
filter value is for any chemical that is last step. 
Generally, the specification for metals is more restrictive for UPW because UPW is generally cleaner than chemicals and 
is mostly the final rinse step after a chemical process step.  The requirements for extractables in UPW, particularly at 
ambient temperature, are typically easier to achieve in UPW than in certain chemicals.  The aggressive nature of the 
chemical environment will tend to extract more metals than UPW.  Further the conveyance (and containment) of organics 
used in the wafer process may extract different organics from the material matrix than UPW.  The aggressive nature of the 
chemicals used in the wafer process places an extra emphasis on the quality and nature of the materials of construction.  
Due to the very small size of particles that can affect the device and the limitation of current metrology, we have to use a 
“proactive” means to measure particles, i.e., we use current methodology to measure larger particles and then using the 
statistical Power Law relate that to smaller particle concentration.  This allows us to list measurable particles into the 
roadmap.  
While we have included filters in the list of Critical Components, we have not addressed the many varieties of configurations 
and materials of construction of filters.  Further the manufacturing of filters is much more complex than the manufacture 
of those made of one raw material.  There is also a myriad of different surface preparations used in filters to provide for a 
specific performance feature.  These are typically chemical in nature (a functional group type of treatment) that further 
complicates the nature of filters.  In addition, there is the pore sizing and type of filtration (e.g., surface vs depth filtration) 
that also adds complexity.  We have included in the Critical Components calculation methodology the use of filters in the 
chemical distribution systems.  This was done to account for the total surface area of everything that touches the fluid as 
accurately as possible.  For any pre-final filter the same logic applies, i.e., it is a static pre-filter component.  We also caution 
that operation of POU filters can be problematic if these are not operated at stable conditions of flow and pressure, because 
filters have the potential to shed particles if not operated properly.  There is still work to be done to assess the ability of 
final filters to remove very small particles (<10nm) and to determine how this information could be used in the allocation 
of particle contribution from critical components before and after a final filter.  
1.2. DRIVERS AND TECHNOLOGY TARGETS 
Yield technology drivers are changing. While in past memory was the primary driver of the Yield Enhancement roadmap 
due to smaller critical dimension, now Logic has become and will likely continue to be the leading driver in the future. 
Logic was chosen to be a driver for Yield roadmap for the following reasons (refer to the IRDS More Moore chapter for 
additional information): 
• 
It has tighter pitch size than that of other types of semiconductor products 
• 
Advanced Flash manufacturing is transitioning to 3D structure where the pitch equivalent is almost an order of 
magnitude larger than that of Logic 
• 
Logic has significantly more metal layers and higher complexity, increasing risks to yield  
• 
Logic has less redundancy compared to Flash memory 
• 
Flash has self-alignment – that is not available for logic 
This year roadmap effort conducted extensive analysis of the possible defect occurrence as function of the device structure. 
New defectivity drivers are based on the device driven definitions, supporting critical dimensions of the advanced logic 
devices (for particles) and device sensitivity to the molecular and ionic contamination (see Figure YE-5).  
1.3. VISION OF FUTURE TECHNOLOGY 
Given significant limitation of particle and other metrology as outlined in the following sections, the vision for future 
technology involved in Yield Enhancement is based on the effort of proactive and systematic defect control throughout the 
entire supply chain. The IRDS Yield Enhancement Chapter will continue focusing on definition of the technology needs 
while the technology providers and SEMI Standards will focus on delivering optimized process control and material purity 
independently of the ability of direct monitoring of those defects. Electrical characterization methods, Big Data and 
modeling will become more and more important for yield learning and yield prediction. 
It should be noted that the vision of future technology in the space of Yield Enhancement is limited to a few next generations, 
as uncertainty of the future device design limits the ability to adequately anticipate and project the needs. There are those 
who believe that future of shrinking beyond 5 nm node may be limited by ability to enable high enough production Yield. 

18  Scope of Report 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
As indicated in the More Moore roadmap, geometrical scaling is approaching its limits that means that if the near-term 
challenges are resolved, it will likely support the technology needs for the longer term than what is currently covered by 
YE roadmap. 
2. SCOPE OF REPORT 
Yield in most industries has been defined as the number of products that can be sold divided by the number of products that 
can be potentially made. In the semiconductor industry, yield is represented by the functionality and reliability of integrated 
circuits produced on the wafer surfaces. During the manufacturing of integrated circuits yield loss is caused for example by 
defects, faults, process variations, and design. The relationship of defects and yield, and an appropriate yield to defect 
correlation, is critical for yield enhancement. 
The previous scope of the Yield Enhancement group, which was More Moore driven front end processing, was extended 
towards More Moore and More than Moore yield considerations. The roadmap focus moved from a technology orientation 
to a product/application orientation. The Yield Enhancement section displays the current and future requirements for high 
yielding manufacturing of More Moore as well as More than Moore products separated in “critical process groups” 
including MEMS, back-end processes, e. g. packaging.  
Airborne molecular contamination (AMC), packaging, liquid chemicals and ultra-pure water were identified as the main 
focus topics for the next period. Electrical characterization methods, big data, and modeling will become increasingly 
important for yield learning and yield prediction. Here Yield Enhancement benefits from the big data activities within the 
Factory Integration IFT. Regarding AMC, liquid chemicals, and ultra-pure water a close link to Environmental Safety and 
Health IFT is already indicated. 
The scope of the report is to provide an overview of the needs of next generation semiconductor technology with respect to 
the measures needed to enable high manufacturing yield of future technologies. Yield enhancement chapter focuses on next 
two generations of technologies due to the urgency of dealing with the challenges of next two generations. There are experts 
who believe that the More Moore roadmap may soon be constrained by Yield. In this case, higher focus should be provided 
on near term roadmap. 
This report provides narrative in support to the enclosed excel document delivering key parameters and their values helping 
to specify quantitative technology targets. This reports also provides an appendix with additional supporting information 
that is used to justify certain definitions in the roadmap table.  
 
Figure YE-8   Yield Enhancement Scope 
In the manufacture of integrated circuits yield loss is related to a variety of sources. During processes such as implantation, 
etching, deposition, planarization, cleaning, lithography, etc. failures responsible for yield loss occur. Several examples of 
contaminations and mechanisms responsible for yield loss are listed in the following: a) airborne molecular contamination 
(AMC) or particles of organic or inorganic matter caused by the environment or by the tools; b) process induced defects as 
scratches, cracks, and particles, overlay faults, and stress; c) process variations resulting, e.g., in differing doping profiles 

Scope of Report  19 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
or layer thicknesses; d) the deviation from design, due to pattern transfer from the mask to the wafer, results in deviations 
and variations of layout and critical dimensions; and e) diffusion of atoms through layers and in the semiconductor bulk 
material. Figure YE-8 illustrates the YE scope. 
The determination of defects and yield, and an appropriate yield to defect correlation are essential for yield enhancement. 
This correlation is of major importance, because not all defects change device properties or cause failure of devices or 
integrated circuits. 
The YE section has two focus topics: “Surface Environment Contamination Control” and “Characterization, Inspection and 
Analysis.” These two topics crosscut front end process technology, interconnect processes, lithography, metrology, design, 
process integration, test, and facility infrastructures. 
Surface Environment Contamination Control – Although most of the parameters in Table YE-3 table do not require 
significant improvements, nor indicate challenges in process critical fluid and gas impurity control, some parameters present 
a serious technology challenge. New materials and their precursors introduce challenges that require continuous study. 
Clarification of potential contamination from point-of-supply to point-of-process will define control systems necessary for 
delivered purity. There are several locations in the pathway from the original delivery package, i.e., the Point of Supply 
(POS) of a liquid or gas to the location where that material contacts the wafer, i.e., the Point of Process (POP), for 
ascertaining purity. This has led to a considerable amount of confusion and ambiguity in discussing the quality of process 
fluids, including the data found in Table YE-3. Table YE-1 summarizes the major fluid handling and/or measurement nodes 
found along the typical systems supplying process fluid. This table is an effort to create a common language for the 
discussion of attributes and requirements at these different node points. Further information regarding pathway nodes can 
be found in the supplementary materials in the Appendix and sources in the References section, such as the Semiconductor 
Equipment and Materials International (SEMI) Standards.  
 
 

20  Summary and Key Points 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
 
Table YE-1   Definitions for the Different Interface Points 
 
POS 
POD 
POC 
POE 
POU 
POP 
 
Delivery Point of 
Gas/Chemical 
Supplier 
Outlet of Central 
Facility System 
Submain or 
VMB/VMP Take off 
Valve 
Entry to Equipment 
or Sub Equipment 
Entry to the 
Process Chamber 
Contact with Wafer 
Ultrapure 
water 
Raw water 
Outlet of final 
filtration in UPW 
plant 
Outlet of submain 
take off valve 
Inlet of wet bench 
or sub-equipment 
(downstream POU 
filter, if available) 
Inlet of wet bench 
bath, spray nozzle, 
or connection point 
to piping, which is 
also used for other 
chemicals 
Wafer in production 
Process 
chemicals 
Chemical 
drum/tote/bulk 
supply 
Outlet of final 
filtration of chemical 
distribution unit 
Outlet of VMB valve 
Inlet of wet bench 
or intermediate tank 
Inlet of wet bench 
bath or spray nozzle 
Wafer in production 
Specialty 
gases 
Gas cylinder or 
bulk specialty gas 
systems 
Outlet of final 
filtration of gas 
cabinet 
Outlet of VMB valve 
Inlet of equipment 
Inlet of chamber 
(outlet of MFC) 
Wafer in production 
Bulk gases 
Bulk gas 
delivered on site 
or gas generator 
Outlet of final 
filtration/purification 
Outlet of submain 
take off valve or 
VMB valve 
Inlet of equipment/ 
sub-equipment 
Inlet of chamber 
(outlet of MFC) 
Wafer in production 
Cleanroom 
and AMC 
Outside air 
Outlet of make-up 
air handling unit 
Outlet of filters in 
cleanroom ceiling 
Inlet to mini-
environment or sub 
equipment for 
AMC, outlet of the 
tool filter for 
particles 
Gas/air in vicinity 
to wafer/substrate 
Wafer/substrate in 
production (AMC/ 
SMC) 
POD—point of delivery   POC—point of connection   POE—point of entry   POP—point of process   POU—point of use   VMB— valve manifold box  
VMP—valve manifold post   UPW—ultra pure water   MFC—mass flow controller   AMC—airborne molecular contamination  
SMC—surface molecular contamination 
Characterization, Inspection and Analysis – Physical device dimensions and corresponding defect dimensions continue 
shrinking, posing new challenges to detection as well as tolerable contamination. The wafer edges and backside were 
identified to show significant impact on yield as well as process variations and design. Development of defect detection, 
defect review, and classification technologies showing highest sensitivity at high throughput is crucial for cost efficient 
manufacturing. Furthermore, for efficient manufacturing the monitoring of contamination in the environment and on the 
wafer, surface requires appropriate analytic capabilities. Automated, intelligent analysis and reduction algorithms, which 
correlate facility, design, process, electrical and virtual metrology results, and their correlation to yield, test and work-in-
progress data, will have to be developed to enhance root cause analysis and therefore enable rapid yield learning. 
3. SUMMARY AND KEY POINTS  
It is recommended that the reader of the IRDS Yield Enhancement Chapter reviews this narrative along with other materials 
and particularly Table YE-3, including associated notes. It is important to keep in mind that although the values in the 
roadmap were defined based on empirical data and modeling, there is no sufficient ground to justify specific technological 
decision, which are expected to be made by the technology end users based on the process specific sensitivities and 
requirements.  
It is also important to note that definition of the semiconductor technology needs in the roadmap does not take into account 
feasibility of existing facility technology and metrology capability. Applying the roadmap values for facility systems 
specifications may pose execution challenges. Instead, it is recommended to refer to definitions of most current SEMI 
standards (if available) where the feasibility issues are taken into account and solutions are recommended, under 
consideration of the roadmap definitions. 
Given limitations of the metrology used in material, environment, and process control, it is recommended to focus on 
proactive measures related to the technology management. Such approach should lean on standardization, data mining, and 
process performance optimizations related to all aspects of the facility, materials, and other technologies involved in the 
Yield enabling and enhancement. Particles control in liquid chemicals and UPW is an example of such challenge. 
 

Challenges  21 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
4. CHALLENGES  
4.1. NEAR-TERM CHALLENGES —CIA  
Currently, one of the important key challenges will be the detection of multiple killer defects and the signal-to-noise ratio. 
It is a challenge to detect multiple killer defects and to differentiate them simultaneously at high capture rates, low cost of 
ownership and high throughput. Furthermore, it is difficult to identify yield relevant defects under a vast amount of nuisance 
and false defects. As another challenge with high priority the requirement for 3D inspection was identified. This necessitates 
for inspection tools with the capability to inspect high aspect ratios but also to detect non-visuals such as voids, embedded 
defects, and sub-surface defects is crucial. The demand for high-speed and cost-effective inspection tools remains, 
especially in the area of 3D inspection as the importance of 3D defect types increases. In subchapter to Characterization, 
Inspection and Analysis another key challenge was identified: detection of organic contamination on surfaces – the detection 
and characterization of non-volatile organics on surfaces is currently not possible in the fab. There are few laboratories or 
fab scale instrumentation available or implemented except ToF-SIMS, and XPS. 
MEMS technologies have different challenges. Inspection and review tools need to be able to handle a broad range of wafer 
thicknesses. Infrared inspection is required as an automatic and full wafer scan option, which is available in principle but 
has not yet proven to meet the required throughput requirements. Review options need to be able to have solely edge grip 
handling and an automatic focus adjustment for a considerable wafer bow.  
Traditional yield management focuses on adequate inline inspection capabilities to detect and control all relevant defect 
types to set up short feedback loops as well as enable correlation to yield and test fails. To move to a more proactive 
approach, a complete range of inline-produced data needs to be used, with the ultimate goal to get signals before hardware 
is affected.  Therefore, a system for yield prediction to achieve a proactive yield perfection based on a full fab data 
transparency is needed. The data used are MES/wafer tracking data, trace (streaming data from machines), metrology, 
defectivity, PCM data, yield data (wafer probe, binsort, final test), consumables/raw material data, facility data, environment 
data, material release data, device and product data, failure analysis data, reliability data, and equipment/maintenance (log 
files). 
The goal will be the improvement of process stability, yield and reliability through a holistic approach for data analysis. 
Major challenges are the connection of all relevant data sources, Continuous learning from unknowns, how to incorporate 
subject matter expertise (SME), the definition of a way to structure and facilitate the capture of relevant information (e.g., 
FDC trace data) to bring value for analysis, traceability, ownership and responsibility on data (overcome ownership siloing) 
Other topics challenging the Yield Enhancement community are listed as follows for the focus in the near term: 
• 
Process stability versus absolute contamination level  
• 
Wafer edge, backside and bevel monitoring and contamination control 
• 
Development of sub 10 nm water and chemical liquid particle counter as well as tight particle control technologies 
(new, tighter filters with low particles shedding and minimal contribution of metal and organic species)  
• 
Correlation yield and contamination levels 
Data, test structures, and methods are needed for correlating critical tool parts quality as well as process fluid contamination 
types and levels to yield and to determine the required control limits. The issues for this challenge are to define the relative 
importance of different contaminants to wafer yield, a standard test for yield/parametric effect, and a maximum process 
variation (control limits). The fundamental challenge is to understand the correlation between impurity concentration in key 
process steps and device yield, reliability, and performance. This correlation will determine whether further increases in 
contamination limits are truly required. The challenge increases in complexity as the range of process materials widens and 
selection of the most sensitive processes for study will be required for meaningful progress. 
Furthermore, in the long term the following key challenges were identified: 
• 
Inline defect characterization and analysis  
The difficult challenges for the Yield Enhancement chapter are summarized in Table YE-2. Currently, the most important 
key challenge will be the detection of multiple killer defects and the signal-to-noise ratio. It is a challenge to detect multiple 
killer defects and to differentiate them simultaneously at high capture rates, low cost of ownership and high throughput. 
Furthermore, it is difficult to identify yield relevant defects under a vast amount of nuisance and false defects. As a challenge 
with second priority the requirement for 3D inspection was identified. This necessitates for inspection tools the capability 
to inspect high aspect ratios but also to detect non-visuals such as voids, embedded defects, and sub-surface defects is 

22  Challenges 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
crucial. The demand for high-speed and cost-effective inspection tools remains, especially in the area of 3D inspection as 
the importance of 3D defect types increases. In 2011 and with the change of the scope of the subchapter to Characterization, 
Inspection and Analysis a new key challenge was identified: Detection of organic contamination on surfaces – the detection 
and speciation of non-volatile organics on surfaces is currently not possible in the fab. There is no laboratory or fab scale 
instrumentation available or implemented.  In 2020 IRDS is in the process of continuing studies in organic precursor 
deposition on the wafer surface.  These studies are to determine the risks associated with organic contamination on the 
wafer surface.  Results were published in 2021. 
Other topics challenging the Yield Enhancement community are prioritized as follows in the near term: 
• 
Process Stability versus Absolute Contamination Level  
• 
Wafer Edge, Backside and Bevel Monitoring and Contamination Control 
• 
Development of sub 10 nm water and chemical liquid particle counter 
• 
Correlation Yield and Contamination Levels 
Furthermore, in the long term the following key challenges were identified: 
• 
Inline defect characterization and analysis  
• 
Next generation lithography 
 
Table YE-2   Yield Enhancement Difficult Challenges 
Near-Term Challenges: 2022-2028 
Description 
Challenge #1  Control of Electrically Active and other 
particles in Ultrapure Water and Liquid Chemicals for 
advanced semiconductor manufacturing (logic key 
driver) 
Insufficient metrology and marginal treatment technology 
capability 
Challenge #2  Control of Electrically Active and other 
particles in UPW of EUV mask production 
Insufficient metrology and marginal treatment technology 
capability 
Challenge #3  Critical Organics in UPW 
Insufficient metrology for online speciation of organics 
Challenge #4  Metals in H2O2 
Insufficient metrology capability. Characterization needed for 
specific critical metals for key process steps and segments.  
Challenge #5  Slurry particle characterization and 
other impurity monitoring 
Insufficient metrology capability 
Challenge #6  Plating chemicals: particles > critical 
size  
(>0.150 µm) (#/ml) 
Need reliable monitoring of large particles 
Challenge #7  Liquid Chemicals: particles > critical 
size (#/ml) 
Need reliable monitoring of particles <10 nm. 
Need Filtration technology that is reliable at the stated 
retention rating and that has minimal "rise up" contributions 
at the time of install into the process. 
Challenge #8  CMP Slurries: large particles > MPS 
(#/ml) 
Need reliable LPC metrology that can measure targeted 
particles sizes and concentrations that ignore the MPS sizes 
and do not require sample dilution to obtain the measurement. 

Challenges  23 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
Near-Term Challenges: 2022-2028 
Description 
Challenge #9  Post-CMP (pCMP) Cleans particles 
Some pCMP cleans will have volatile or highly reactive 
ingredients that form bubbles in solution, therefore; new 
metrology and new techniques will be needed to differentiate 
between bubbles and real particles for contamination control. 
The pCMP cleans that contain surfactants will have micelle 
particles and structures that are necessary for the chemistry to 
perform the intended function. The need is for reliable and 
accurate metrology to distinguish micelles from other foreign 
particles in solution. 
Challenge #10  Particle measurement for ISO class 1 
Need more efficient and effective laser particle counters with 
detection limit << 100 nm or CPC with sample flow >> 0,1 
cfm 
Challenge #11  AMC metrology 
Need of more sensitive gas analyzers for HCl, HF, HNO3, 
HBr, NH3, Total Acids, H2S, SO2, organic acids, sulphuric 
acids and Total bases   with detection limit << 100 ppt 
Challenge #12  Particle contribution by critical 
components and its control  
Insufficient analytical capability and unknown level of 
cleanliness 
Challenge #13 Critical metals in UPW for CMOS 
image sensors 
Insufficient metrology sensitivity below 200 ppq 
concentration 
Challenge #14 Low concentration particle 
measurement in the 10-100nm range to check the 
cleanliness of gases and to judge the contribution to 
particle cleanliness from hardware present in the gas 
delivery system (upstream or downstream from POD). 
Preferably these measurements should be possible at a freely 
selectable flowrate instead of fixed 1 cfm or 0.1 cfm 
Challenge #15 Composition and/or structural 
information for <100nm particles, especially when 
present in small numbers. 
Low amounts of particles have the potential of creating 
issues. Having excess to techniques that can learn about 
elemental composition and/or chemical structures can help a 
lot in root cause finding of observed issues. 
Challenge #16 Particulate precursor metrology < 10 
nm 
Need better understanding of particle precursors and critical 
concentrations to form particles. Important to determine 
relationship between species/concentrations and particle size. 
Challenge #17 Removing particles < 30 nm 
Overcoming the static/van der Waals forces that make 
particles adhere to critical surfaces is much more difficult for 
particles < 30 nm. 
Long-Term Challenges: 2029–2037  
Description 
OUT OF CURRENT SCOPE OF YIELD ENHANCEMENT 
 
 
 

24  Challenges 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
4.2. SURFACE ENVIRONMENTAL CONTAMINATION CONTROL 
Surface environmental contamination control requirements are categorized by manufacturing materials or environment, as 
shown in Table YE-3. 
 
Table YE-3   Technology Requirements for Surface Environmental Contamination Control 
 
Surface environment control—The surface environment control includes the ambient space around the wafer at all times, 
whether the wafers are open to the cleanroom air or stored in PODs/FOUPs. As the list of ambient contaminants to be 
controlled broadens so must measurement capabilities. Affordable, accurate, repeatable, high capture rate, real time sensors 
for non-particulate contamination are becoming increasingly necessary. The use of inert environments to transport and store 
wafers is expected to increase with process sensitivities. Pre-gate, pre-contact clean, salicidation, exposed copper, and 
reticle exposure are cited as processes that first require this capability. In addition, using inert environments offers the 
opportunity to reduce the introduction of moisture into vacuum load-lock tools, thereby decreasing contamination and load-
lock pump-down times. While closed carrier purging systems exist and are evolving, tool environments that may need to 
become inert, such as wet sink end-stations, present a challenge. As wafer isolation technologies evolve, design and material 
selection of carriers and enclosures will be critical for performance in isolating the wafers from the ambient and in not 
contributing contaminants themselves. All carriers and enclosure materials must meet factory one specifications. In 
addition, the materials and designs must not promote cross-contamination between processes. Seal technology, low-
outgassing, and non-absorbing materials development are key to an effective wafer and reticle isolation deployment. 
Airborne molecular contamination (AMC)— Fugitive emissions from chemicals used in wafer processing and inadequate 
exhaust are the main sources of AMC. Only in some highly congested area, makeup air is a significant yet temporarily 
important source for AMC. Outgassing from materials of construction in the cleanroom, wafer processing equipment, post 
processed wafers, and wafer environmental enclosures as well as inadequate exhaust and fugitive emissions from chemicals 
used in wafer processing are the main sources of AMC. Oxygen and water vapor as well as low concentration atmospheric 
contaminants (e.g., CO, O3) can also be considered as part of the AMC burden. Acid vapors in the air have been linked to 
corrosion, as well as with the release of boron from HEPA filters. The impact of amines on deep ultraviolet (DUV) 
photoresists are well known examples of AMC affecting wafer processing. Hydrocarbon films of only a few monolayers 
may lead to loss of process control, especially for front-end processes. Other areas of concerns for AMC are IPA from 
semiconductor cleaning equipment and corrosion when Cu is exposed. The impact of AMC on wafer processing can only 
be expected to become more deleterious. This is not only driven by device dimensions decreasing but also by the 
introduction of new chemistry and recipes for future technical nodes that exhibit new defect schemes. Besides AMC creating 
defects to the wafer surface or bulk material Yield Enhancement group engages on defects or shortfalls in productivity that 
originate from the impact of AMC to production tools as reticles, metrology, or exposure tools. AMC is in many cases - as 
for excursions - a highly dynamic phenomenon. AMC control deals mainly with prevention of AMC release for which a 
tight source control is mandatory. There is clearly a need for better AMC monitoring instrumentation in the clean room to 
measure AMC at the part per trillion level (by volume) in real time. Surface acoustic wave (SAW) devices and atmospheric 
pressure ionized mass spectroscopy (APIMS) have been used to measure low level AMC, but a larger variety of on-line 
methods and instrumentation is needed and expected to be available in the future, see also the link for AMC monitoring 
programs in the Appendix. Table YE-4 and YE-4a provide more detail for AMC monitoring and on-line methods. 
Table YE-4   AMC Monitoring Methods 
 
Table YE-4a   Supporting Table for On-line Methods 
 
Numerous studies related to AMC outgassing from the materials of construction of environmental enclosures and FOUPs 
have been performed to guide material selection for these enclosures. Progress has been made by proper material choice 
and pump-and-purge steps for FOUPs support reducing AMC induced wafer defects. The potential for AMC to impact new 
processes should be considered in all process integration studies.  
While not specifically mentioned, charged defects are also an area of concern where ion control is critical in areas such as 
lithography, particularly EUV. Wafer charging must also be managed to avoid attracting charged particles to the wafer. 
 

Challenges  25 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
4.2.1. CRITICAL COMPONENTS 
One of the biggest challenges of contamination affecting Yield is due to our limited ability to control particles. In both high 
purity liquid chemicals and UPW, the particles originate mostly from the materials of construction of the components used 
in the respective liquid delivery systems. The following sections discuss the implications and additional controls needed to 
maintain sufficiently low level of particles. However, it is important to make sure that the materials used in those systems 
are of adequate quality to mitigate the risk of particles occurrence.  
The challenge of such particle quality control is due to the limitations of the existing analytical techniques and related 
metrology to qualify high purity components. Currently used SEMI F0573  and SEMI F1044  methods only measure 
particles of the size of 100 nm and larger. There is a need for 10nm particle measurement of the components shedding. 
Metrology for such analysis does not currently exist, although new non-optical particle detection techniques are being 
developed for detecting 10nm and smaller particles. Application of the Power Law from 100 nm to 10 nm and less has not 
been demonstrated and hence cannot be assumed to hold true. Ability to measure 10nm particles is critical to gaining actual 
understanding of particle performance for critical components. 
4.2.2. ULTRAPURE WATER QUALITY 
Ultrapure water – Specific definitions of the water quality requirements to enable future technology are presented in the 
Table YE-3. Critical challenges are summarized in Table YE-2b  
Particle levels are reduced using the best available ultra-filtration (UF) technology, but today’s particle counting technology 
is not able to keep up with critical particle node due to continued scaling of critical semiconductor devices. Lack of proven 
particle metrology limits the ability to confirm whether UF is effective in controlling killer size particles down to the critical 
particle size referenced in Table YE-3. Section 1.1.1 provides an explanation of the proactive approach used in UPW. 
It is important to note that the roadmap is focused on technology enabling, thus identifying the parameters that require new 
technologies for monitoring and control. For the practical purposes, SEMI F063 provides a guide that can be used as a 
reference specification for the UPW quality in design and operation of advanced semiconductor processes, considering 
feasibility of the existing technologies. UPW SEMI standards are in process of alignment with the new direction of the 
UPW roadmap for proactive technology management.  
More stringent criteria beyond 2021 are only projected where there is evidence that manufacturing process requirements 
demand improvements. UPW is generally the cleanest fluid available in the manufacturing process. Limited data is currently 
available to correlate contamination level to device yield. For this reason, the UPW Roadmap for contamination tolerance 
is relatively stable over time.  
The UPW section of Table YE-3 considers some parameters as process variables rather than contaminants. The stability of 
the wafer processing environment can be as important as the level of contaminants present for some parameters. For 
example, some semiconductor manufacturers treat dissolved oxygen (DO2) in this way, while others consider it a 
contaminant. Stability of temperature continues to be important for immersion lithography.  
Since 2018 some commonly monitored parameters such as resistivity and bacteria were no longer included in the table, as 
they do not represent technology challenges and are only used for monitoring operational performance of the UPW systems. 
These parameters are critical for the water quality, but non-critical for the future technology enabling. Bacteria can be 
controlled down to a level of non-detect and the resistivity has become not sensitive enough to monitor water quality 
variation within the ranges targeted for the ionic species in UPW.  
UPW parameters were reviewed for the 2018 roadmap for the specific location where they are critical to maintaining 
semiconductor yield. The notes to the Table YE-3 contain definitions for these parameters. Some parameters are specified 
for point of process (POP), while the others are specified in various locations. The definitions are driven by the consideration 
of whether the tool environment may further contribute to changes in those parameters. 
 
4.2.2.1. PARTICLE CONTAMINATION IN UPW 
The focus has turned more to critical parameters such as particles, metals, and organic compounds. Particles remain a high 
and growing risk, critical for implementing future semiconductor technology due to its high sensitivity to decreasing line 
 
3 SEMI F057- Specification for Polymer Materials and Components Used in Ultrapure Water and Liquid Chemical Distribution 
Systems 
4 SEMI F104 - Particle Test Method Guide for Evaluation of Components Used in Ultrapure Water and Liquid Chemical Distribution 
Systems 

26  Challenges 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
widths. On-line metrology for particles in liquid does not address killer particle size, and therefore, filtration efficiency for 
killer particles is not known. At the same time, it is apparent that the killer size of the particles has approached filtration 
capability of the most advanced final filters. Furthermore, there is some test data suggesting the particle challenge 
concentrations to the final filters from UPW system components can be much higher than previously believed (Refer to 
SEMI C795  and SEMI C936  for filter performance test data and UPW Polish ion exchange particle shedding, respectively).  
Detailed analysis provided with input from More Moore suggested the higher criticality of the electrically active particles 
(EAP) compared to other particles. This difference is reflected in Table YE-3.  
Particles continue to be important for EUV mask operation because the EUV mask defect has in semiconductor 
manufacturing, replicating of thousands of times during the lifetime of the mask. The mask is expected to be defect free, 
which requires particularly tight particle control in mask production. It is important to note that the killer size of the particles 
on mask is independent of the device pitch size, but a function of the EUV wavelength (refer to the sizes of killer particles 
in Table YE-3).  
Colloidal silica, long considered as delta between total and reactive silica, has been removed from the roadmap, even though 
experimental work further confirmed high criticality of this material. Colloidal silica is now considered and treated as a 
particle, subject to the particle specification in the table. If colloidal silica particles are controlled to the particles 
specification, all measurable silica in UPW will be in the form of dissolved silica. Hence the value for a total silica 
specification remains (total silica = dissolved/reactive silica). Reactive silica concentration is limited due to its negative 
impact on device yield, forming water marks on the wafer. In this case, reactive silica specification can be measured using 
either total silica analyses methods (i.e., ICP-MS) or as reactive silica (by colorimetric method) to the level specified in the 
table. For practical purposes, measuring total and reactive silica may be considered to confirm no presence of colloidal 
silica.  
As a workaround to the particle metrology gap, the UPW forum has worked with SEMI to develop a filter performance 
validation standard (SEMI C079) as a risk mitigation measure. The UPW Task Force of SEMI has also developed a 
document for ion exchange resin testing, thus helping to mitigate significant particle shedding from the resin. It is believed 
that ion exchange resin sheds different forms of organic materials between low (LMW) and high molecular weight (HMW); 
these organic materials are dissolved as well as undissolved materials (particles). It is now believed (based on experimental 
data) that HMW dissolved organics may permeate through the UPW final filters and form particles on the wafers due to the 
drying mechanism. This adds further complexity to particle monitoring in UPW as current optical particle counters target 
suspended solids particles and are incapable of detecting these organic, or soft particles. Even sub-ppb levels of very HMW 
organics may form particles levels greater than millions of organic particles per milliliter of UPW and subsequently 
extremely high numbers of particles on the wafer surface. Additional experimental work is needed (and is being planned) 
to verify this concern. 
4.2.2.2. PARTICLE PRECURSORS 
The smallest critical particle size for the manufacture of semiconductors is now 3.5 nm. The semiconductor industry is 
entering a region where particles, particle precursors and molecules in liquids, begin to overlap.  Particle precursors are 
defined as a dissolved or suspended nanomaterial that when dried could result in a particle of critical size. The ability to 
distinguish particle precursors from solid particles in UPW is becoming critical. While advanced filtration can remove 
nanometer sized solid particles, the same filter may have little or no ability to remove particle precursors. 
A primary source of particle precursors in UPW are thought to be high-molecular weight organics that rinse off ion-
exchange resins. As part of the development of SEMI C93 “Guide for Determining the Quality of Ion Exchange Resin used 
in Polish Applications for Ultrapure Water System”, a benchmark study was initiated. The benchmark study consisted of 
monitoring the “particles” rinsing off a number of virgin polish resins using the particle detection technique “Nebulization 
and Condensation Particle Counting”. Particles were detected as high as 1E9 particles per mL. Using the Focused Aerosol 
Deposition technique, these particles were found to contain sulfur, supporting the thesis that this material came from the 
resin. 
Further benchmarking studies using the high molecular weight organic Poly (sodium 4-styrenesulfonate), Mw 
approximately 70,000da, have been deposited on one inch silicon wafer. Analysis of the silicon wafer surface by SEM and 
surface scan metrology have indicated the presence of a high concentration of nanometer sized particles attributed to the 
 
5 SEMI C79-0113 - Guide to Evaluate the Efficacy of Sub-15 nm Filters Used in Ultrapure Water (UPW) Distribution Systems 
6 SEMI C93-0217 - Guide for Determining the Quality of Ion Exchange Resin Used in Polish Applications of Ultrapure Water System 

Challenges  27 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
high-molecular weight organic. This confirms the ability of particle precursors in the form of high molecular polymers, 
may become killer particles and present a serious problem to the future manufacture of semiconductors. 
Series of experiments were performed in 2022 using High Molecular Weight (HMW) Organic compounds and ion exchange 
resin leach-outs deposited on wafer surface which determined that higher concentration of these compounds in the UPW 
sample showed notable correlation to higher particle counts on wafer surfaces. This was measured on wafer surface scan 
metrology and comparable results were found using an alternative method with particle detection to 8nm. Particle 
distribution was similar in bulk liquid sample and both surface detection methods.   
4.2.2.3. METAL CONTAMINATION IN UPW 
The IRDS roadmap has revisited its approach to metal specification. The details of the new approach are provided is the 
white paper linked in the Appendix. The current approach includes special considerations for CMOS image sensors. New 
parameters for critical metals for image sensors have been introduced. Target levels of critical metals is redefined. For some 
metals, this target level is below limits of detection of most advanced metrology. 
4.2.2.4. ORGANIC CONTAMINATION IN UPW 
There has been an increased interest in the past few years to understand how organic contamination of UPW may affect 
semiconductor devices. Organic contamination is currently measured in terms of its total organic carbon content or TOC. 
This measurement of the organic content does not account for the type of organic and how it may react with various wafer 
surfaces or how the reaction may impact device yield. In place of TOC we are now categorizing organic compounds in 
UPW for critical and non-critical based on their boiling point. Immersion lithography lens hazing was previously a driver 
of UPW TOC<1.0 ppb.  
The Yield roadmap includes a separate line for immersion lithography TOC (<1.0 ppb), implying that this may be required 
as POU definition, while the rest of the water quality spec was relaxed to 3 ppb of non-critical organics. We continue 
working on a new definition of critical organics, based on polar strength as quantified using boiling point. The definition 
of the critical organics was included in the table notes, which recommend end users to consider characterization of the UPW 
organics in their own specs. New metrology is needed for on-line detection of the critical organics. 
● 
Critical Organics – non-volatile polar organic compounds with boiling point >200°C 
− 
Critical organic compounds should be controlled to <1 ppb 
− 
Organic compounds are categorized as critical with respect to its ability to form a hydrogen bond with any oxide 
surfaces including gate, tunnel, or native oxide  
− 
Total non-critical organic compounds should be controlled to <3 ppb  
● 
Critical carbon atoms on wafer related to TOC in bulk fluid 
− 
Defined by FEP as 1x1012 atoms/cm2 for Si-C defect in furnace. 
− 
Breakdown of organic compounds particularly at higher temperature (>200oC) is an important consideration for 
the formation of Si-C defect. The level proposed is considered to be adequate to mitigate such risk of such defect 
formation. 
− 
Critical boiling point of organic compounds previously defined by FEP as 200oC 
− 
UPW IRDS group is looking at compounds with lower boiling point that may be related to other defects  
In addition to the above definition of the critical organics, there is special attention to HMW organics; their mechanism of 
impact to wafers may be due to killer size particle formation. This aspect is a growing focus of the UPW team. 
We continue to use failure mode effects analysis (FMEA) approach to determine the overall risk of each subgroup to the 
wafer manufacturing process. Previously the UPW team completed an organic speciation benchmarking study which used 
LC-OCD analysis to speciate-organic compounds in UPW used at ten advanced technology facilities. This information is 
available as supporting documents and will provide baseline data to identify typical organic compounds in semiconductor 
UPW systems and can be used for occurrence risk factor in the FMEA review. 
UPW measurement methodologies—General test methodologies for monitoring contaminants in UPW are indicated in the 
Figure YE-9 below. Over the past few years the UPW IRDS team has benchmarked many advanced UPW systems to 
determine water quality. Past benchmark efforts have identified the inadequacy of some measurement methodologies to 
quantify contaminants in the UPW. Sensitivity of the following methods is presently adequate: viable bacteria, dissolved 

28  Challenges 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
gasses, ions, total organic, and metals. While particle measurement is not adequately sensitive to validate quality at the 
critical dimension it continues to be a valuable tool to detect filtration failures.  
 
Parameter 
Measured (POD/POC) 
Test Method[A] 
TOC 
Online 
Membrane-Conductivity/CO2, 
Conductivity/CO2 
Organic ions 
Lab 
Ion chromatography 
Other organics 
Lab 
LC-MS, GC-MS, LC-OCD 
Total silica 
Lab 
ICP-MS or GFAAS 
Reactive Silica 
Lab 
Colorimetry 
Particle monitoring 
Online 
Light scatter (additional new methods are being 
qualified) 
Particle 
count/characterization 
Lab 
SEM—capture filter at various pore sizes 
Cations, anions, metals 
Lab 
Ion chromatography, ICP-MS 
Dissolved O2 
Online 
Electric cell 
Dissolved N2 
Online 
Electric cell 
 
ICP-MS—inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry    GFAAS—graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrometry    SEM—
scanning electron microscope  
Note: [A] See SEMI F63 and F75 for additional information about UPW metrology 
Figure YE-9   General Test Methodology for Ultrapure Water 
 
UPW and liquid chemicals particle measurement—Problem Definition and Goals: The sensitivity limit of particle counters 
for UPW and liquid chemicals has not kept pace with critical particle size (the size of particles which are thought to be 
detrimental to wafer yield). Although this concept needs to be discussed again since particles not only impact yield because 
of their physical dimensions, but even more by the chemical composition, e.g., as spot Fe contamination. Measurements of 
these nanoparticles are made difficult by their low scattering efficiency. Low particle concentrations and small sample 
volumes of current particle monitors can result in large sample-to-sample variability. More sensitive particle measurement 
methodology with adequate measurement statistics is needed to meet projected purity goals. 
4.2.3. THE PARTICLE SENSITIVITY PROBLEM 
The highest sensitivity laser on-line particles counter commercially available for both UPW and liquid chemicals is 0.02 
microns. Even at this size the detection efficiency is only 2–5%, so most particles at 0.02 microns and smaller go undetected. 
Improvements in particle counter sensitivity for UPW have been accomplished by increases in laser power. While 
improvements in sensitivity for liquid chemical particle counters are viable, further sensitivity improvements for UPW 
using this approach are unlikely, due to the significant cost implications. There is an ongoing effort to develop alternative 
technologies to the optically based particle counters.  
To estimate the concentration of smaller particles in chemicals, currently an extrapolation is made that assumes a 1/d3 
relationship between particle counts and particle size in liquid chemicals. The further away the particle size of interest gets 
from actual measurement capabilities, the higher the potential for error-error being defined as the difference in the projected 
value compared to the true value. Moreover, the power law coefficient may be significantly affected by the actual filtration 
capability of the final filters used upstream to the particle measurement, making projections impossible. Therefore, it is 

Challenges  29 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
important for the industry to develop a more sensitive method that can measure particle concentrations at greater sensitivity 
to validate the particle count versus particle size relationship so that the relationship can continue to be reliably used. Power 
low is not currently used/recommended for specification of the critical liquid chemical and UPW quality. However, the use 
of power law is considered to be effective for the critical components as particles contributes by those components are not 
affected by filtration (in contrast with UPW and chemicals). 
4.2.4. THE MEASUREMENT PRECISION PROBLEM 
Statistical process control is increasingly being used to monitor the consistency of process parameters. Process variation of 
fluid purity can be as critical to wafer yield as the absolute purity of the fluids. Therefore, it is important that measurement 
methods detect a sufficient number of events to ensure confidence in measured particle concentrations. Development of 
other statistically significant particle counting methods or a higher sample volume particle counter is needed to improve 
confidence in reported particle counts. The sample volume (volume of fluid measured) will determine the number of particle 
counts that are detected during the sample interval. Refer to SEMI F063 for additional information on particles monitoring 
in UPW.  
Although the gas/liquid chemical section of Table YE-3 shows an essentially flat purity trend, there is likelihood that 
specific process steps may require higher purity. In some cases, yield improvements may be achieved more by reducing 
variations in purity than by reduction of average contamination levels. Hence, there is a need for improved statistical process 
control of contamination levels during manufacturing and delivery of these process materials. In 2008, SEMI released the 
results of a comprehensive effort to create a standard set of guidelines for defining “in control” specialty gases7. A 
coincident effort by several large semiconductor manufacturers began for the purchase of selected specialty gases. Although 
the number of companies that have started utilizing in control guidelines for the purchase of consumable raw materials has 
increased, along with the breadth of the offering for in control materials, the industry has not yet settled on one standard set 
of criteria.  
Overview for gases and liquid chemicals—The recommended contaminant values for gases and chemicals in Table YE-3 
represent typical gas/liquid chemical quality requirements at the point of entry to the process tool (POE) for the more 
demanding manufacturing processes in the roadmap. In many applications, the requirements for the contaminants in these 
gases and/or liquid chemicals may be relaxed as dictated by the specific process requirements. On the other hand, some 
manufacturers have claimed benefits from lower contaminant levels. Considering that a given process can be run 
successfully within a “window” defined by a range of material purity and also by ranges in other parameters (purging time, 
etc.), it follows that, in practice, trade-offs exist between imposed purity requirements, process throughput, etc. Pushing a 
process to the upper limit of its “purity window” may require significant investment of time and effort in optimizing other 
parameters, and the economics of pursuing that effort will depend on the environment. It may also be that benefits attributed 
to low contaminant levels are more attributable to the reduction in contaminant variations achieved with high-purity process 
gases and chemicals. This topic is addressed in more detail below regarding the push for the adoption of statistical process 
control, SPC, for specifying process fluid purity. 
There are three primary sources of process environment contamination: One is the impurities in the process materials as 
supplied. The second is the delivery system or the process itself. The third is decomposition, which may be caused thermally 
or by reaction with adventitious contaminants e.g., moisture. These contamination sources are found throughout the 
pathway from the delivered gas or chemical to the wafer surface. Table YE-1 describes the several interfacial points of 
process materials with equipment found along these paths and associates them with the various chapters within the IRDS 
and other organizations such as SEMI that focuses on them. This helps to clarify the relationship of these organizations 
with the WECC while also removing ambiguity about the definition of various points along the process path. 
While purity measurements at the Point of Process, POP (that is, in the processing chamber itself), would provide the most 
direct correlation between gas or liquid quality and process performance, these measurements are often exceedingly difficult 
to obtain except for certain fluid properties in wafer immersion baths. Examples include both particulate generation during 
plasma processes and wafer out gassing. The latter is the most important source of water vapor contamination in many 
processes, often obscuring moisture contributions from the process fluid. Measurements at the POU provide the most direct 
information of the quality of process fluids going directly into the process chamber, but these are also not available for 
many of the common processes.  
Because of these difficulties, the values in Table YE-3 are intended to represent those at the Point of Entry, POE, defined 
as the inlet to the process tool as described in Table YE-1. There are sufficient measurement data on bulk gases and aqueous 
fluids to provide guidance regarding POE impurity levels for many applications, although measurements on these fluids are 
 
7 SEMI. Standard Practices for the Development of Ship to Control Process Limits, 2008. 

30  Challenges 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
often performed at the POS, POD, or POC. For these materials, which are relatively unreactive and delivered in large 
volume, the extrapolation to POE is generally very reasonable. In the case of Specialty Gases and other reactive process 
fluids, such extrapolation is more delicate because delivered volumes are smaller, increasing sensitivity to contamination 
effects, and degradation in the distribution system related to materials of construction, atmospheric contamination, thermal 
degradation, etc. is more likely. These factors are minimized with normal best construction and operations practices, and 
therefore the best guidance available is often regarding POS specification and to a lesser extent POD or POC measurements, 
which are interpreted as equivalent to POE. In summary, while the intention is to recommend POE purity levels for all 
gases and liquids, in practice, the supporting data has more often been collected at POS, POD, or POC. 
The targeted levels can be reached either by bulk delivery of a fluid with requisite purity or through use of a local 
purification/filtration. Care should be taken, at a minimum, to maintain the quality of the gas coming from the source, 
ensuring that contamination is not added downstream of the POS, as may occur due to particle generation at components, 
moisture out gassing, byproduct generation due to incompatible materials, etc. Particle filtration as close to the POU as 
possible is generally advisable for gases. For the most critical applications a local purifier may be used to enhance or ensure 
ultimate purity at the POU. In those cases, the prevailing approach is to seek POC levels that are adequate for the process 
and to view the purifier as “insurance.” The challenge to the purifier is minimal, and long purifier lifetimes can normally 
be expected.       
Point of use purifiers and filtration units are finding application in newer atomic layer deposition techniques, ALD, for 
example where the films are deposited by the monolayer and incorporated impurities can be especially destructive. A 
near/medium term challenge is filtration of the precursor vapor. The sources can be sublimable solids or readily condensable 
vapors of low volatility liquids. These can resolidify or reliquify causing plugging and instability in fluid transfer to the 
substrate surface. In addition, these vapor delivery systems are typically low pressure (<100 Torr) which can change the 
fluid dynamics and hence filtration efficiency dramatically. One additional limitation with the POUP systems in particular 
is endpoint monitoring to determine when the purifier matrix is exhausted. Practically this is handled by routine change out 
of the purifier units at a frequency that typically results in no problems. 
Specific purity challenges will be discussed below, but generally there is little objective evidence to suggest that the purity 
levels listed in Table YE-3 are not suitable for multiple generations of semiconductor manufacturing. Yield improvements 
are expected to be achieved by reducing variations in purity. Statistical process control (SPC) on incoming materials will 
reduce variation at the POS. Inconsistencies at the POU may remain due to variations in downstream contributions, e.g., 
when the flow in a distribution system is decreased, moisture contamination due to out gassing tends to increase. Elimination 
of these variations may again require purification at the appropriate point (e.g., POU purification, POUP). 
Bulk and Specialty Gases—The major bulk gases are listed separately in Table YE-3. The 2007 roadmap had indicated an 
increase in purity requirements post 45 nm. This type of improvement might be anticipated, based upon historical trends as 
design rules tightened, but there is again little objective evidence to support the need for improvements across the range of 
bulk gases. Informal poling of several large semiconductor manufacturing organizations suggests that an increase above 
current purity requirements for the majority of bulk gases is not necessary to meet post 45 nm design rule manufacturing. 
For very special applications where extraordinarily higher purities are critical, special purity grades or additional 
purification will be required. As exemplified above, downstream POUP might also be utilized as an additional means of 
removing variability in POS gases. Therefore, Table YE-3 has been modified from 2005 to remove many of the step 
improvements scheduled for future manufacturing nodes except where specific information has been identified to justify 
the change.  
The situation is similar for many of the Specialty Gases, although several additional categories of applications have been 
added to better identify needs for specific processes, e.g., etch, deposition, doping and laser applications. Like the Bulk 
gases, the values in Table YE-3 have been left at current levels, unless an objective justification for increased purity can be 
identified. Although changes to the current Table YE-3 values for gases are small, the introduction of so many new materials 
and the process innovations required to meet future design rules, e.g., atomic layer deposition, will require close monitoring.  
Statistical process control for process gases and liquids was implemented circa 2005 by large semiconductor manufacturer 
for a selection of critical process fluids, e.g., TEOS. Rather than simply meeting specification values for a set of quality 
control parameters, the materials were selected against specifications dictated by statistical control of variability of the 
materials. The utilization of SPC selection criteria continues and has expanded, however, there are still no standards 
accepted across the industry that define the SPC process.  
The promise of providing “in control” process fluids is anticipated to improve process yields by either minimizing the 
overall variability of the manufacturing process or in simply reducing the likelihood of a process crash resulting from large 
variations in material quality that would still nominally have met a more standard specification. 

Challenges  31 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
An informal survey of several large semiconductor manufacturing companies on their implementation of statistical process 
control requirements for their bulk and specialty gas purchases indicates that SPC processes are already being applied to 
many of the materials utilized in manufacturing or will be shortly. However, the criteria that form the basis of “in control” 
varies substantially. Survey responses suggest that customer expectation is that the application of process control for the 
preparation of POS materials will improve their semiconductor manufacturing process stability and are critical for high 
yield manufacturing. Initial implementation will likely focus on specialty gases that exhibit the greatest potential for causing 
semiconductor process variability, e.g., anhydrous HCl but will be used on new and existing products for both memory and 
microprocessors. See Table YE-4b. 
 
Table YE-4b   Supporting Table for Bulk Gas On-line Methods 
 
Liquid chemicals—Table YE-3 summarizes the purity requirements for liquid chemicals delivered to process tools. Pre-
diffusion cleaning and EUV mask blank cleaning requirements drive the most aggressive impurity levels. Liquid particle 
level targets are shown to become purer each technology generation. These target values are derived from the purity 
requirements on a wafer as calculated by the FEP surface preparation group assuming a linear relationship between the 
concentration in the liquid and on the wafer. Particle counters currently are capable of measuring only to 40 nm for liquid 
chemicals. By assuming a particle size distribution, it should be possible to infer particle concentrations to smaller particle 
sizes, but this will be influenced by the level of filtration utilized. Another measurement challenge for several chemicals is 
the differentiation between particles and bubbles, which is currently not possible.  
The ability to accurately analyze organic, anion, and cation contamination in process chemicals is becoming more critical 
to successful wafer processing. ALD/CVD precursors: At recent nodes Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD) processes have 
been adopted aggressively and that proliferation is expected to accelerate in the future. ALD processes will therefore 
constitute a growing subset of the processes used in HVM and some discussion of common/unique aspects of ALD 
processes with respect to Surface Environmental Contamination Control (SECC) is warranted.       
Table YE-3 contains information only for very few CVD/ALD precursors. The variety of layers and the respective 
contaminants is enormous.  
Therefore, a link to the precursor table is provided in the Appendix. The precursor table provides information by application 
as to which precursors are potential candidates at different technology generations, and the nature of contamination that can 
be expected. A major challenge is the development of accelerated yield learning for critical processes that introduce new 
precursors that will only be used for one or two generations. 
Bulk/specialty gases—There were only a few changes to the bulk gas purity requirements. The measurement of organic 
refractory components at <0.1 ppb is a detect ability challenge for both nitrogen and helium used in lithography applications. 
The roadmap indicates these areas as orange from 2007 to 2010 because this is at the limit of detection for current analytical 
methods. 
In addition, changes were made to better delineate the need to control Ar as an impurity. The N2 specification was changed 
to eliminate Ar as a critical impurity, although it was left in the O2 specification. Even so, the 50 ppbv limit given in 2005 
was raised to an Ar limit of <1000 ppbv. The ongoing requirement in O2 derives from the potential for uncontrolled Ar 
impurities to impact plasma etching processes, although typical Ar specifications for O2 used for etching is more consistent 
with the <1000 ppbv level. 
Novel materials—More detailed consideration of the impurity levels found in the growing number of novel materials used 
in processing will be increasingly important. Requisite purity levels for critical materials such as novel metal oxides, CMP 
slurries, low/high k dielectric materials, precursor materials (such as CVD and electroplating solutions) for barrier and 
conductor metals (such as Cu, Ta) have not been widely studied, and many of these materials have not been called out in 
Table YE-3. An early attempt to start to catalogue and characterize the properties of the thin film precursors utilized in 
semiconductor processing is found in the supplementary material for this chapter. 
Deposition precursors for thin film materials are often sensitive to moisture, air and high temperatures. Control over the 
delivery process from the POS to the reaction chamber is critical to high yielding performance. The use of very high purity 
carrier and purge gases in these systems are often required to prevent decomposition that can contribute detrimental 
molecular and particulate impurities. Traditionally bulk purifiers were used in the bulk gas delivery systems to remove 
particles and other homogeneous chemical contaminations like oxygen, or moisture present in the supply gases. However, 
with the development and commercial availability of point-of-use (POU) purifiers, there is a strong interest from end users 
to utilize point-of-use (POU) purifiers particularly for specialty gases needed for critical process steps with very critical 
level of contamination control. These point-of-use purifiers (POU) are highly effective to remove chemical contaminants 

32  Technology Requirements 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
to extreme low level (~ ppt), easy to use, easy to replace, with low cost-of-ownership. The capability of placing those point-
of-use (POU) purifiers very close to inlet of process chamber, assures least travel path (less contamination) for process 
gases after chemical purification and filtration. 
Novel measurement techniques and impact studies are needed to ensure that these materials are produced with the impurity 
specifications that meet technology requirements. Additional detail on the variety of thin film precursors under 
consideration can be found in Liquid Chemicals section of Table YE-3 and the supplementary precursor table. 
4.3. CHARACTERIZATION, INSPECTION AND ANALYSIS 
The following section of the near-term challenges remains unchanged from 2020 publication. 
This subchapter focuses on equipment requirements to perform the characterization inspection and analysis tasks. This is 
facing the demands of nowadays yield enhancement in a broad application as e.g. ‘More than Moore’ technologies but also 
power electronics and mechatronics and MEMS applications. Furthermore, the characterization, inspection and analysis 
demands of e.g., packaging and assembly could be taken into account.  
The More Moore requirements for defect detection on un-patterned wafers as well as patterned wafers are the most 
challenging. Therefore, those requirements are directly integrated in the More Moore chapter for Logic. As Logic was 
defined to be the technology driver see chapter 1.2. 
A specific MEMS expert group is defining the specific requirements of inline control in MEMS production. The different 
MEMS technologies need to be separated in surface and bulk technologies for it causes different requirements to inspection 
and characterization. Surface technology is defined for structures till 30 µm depth. Any stacked technologies and those with 
depth more than 30 µm are considered bulk technology. 
The detailed requirements are presented in Table YE-5. 
 
Table YE-5   Yield Requirements for MEMS Production 
 
4.4. LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 
This section is not included in the Yield chapter due to the focus on near term challenges. 
5. TECHNOLOGY REQUIREMENTS 
5.1. SUMMARY 
The Technology Requirements section deals with the issues outlined in the Critical Challenges section. 
The Yield Enhancement Technology Requirements include definitions of the yield characterization, inspection, and 
analysis, as well as definitions of the level of impurities of the materials and environments used in semiconductor 
manufacturing. Table YE-3 provides a list of the parameters and their level that needs to be controlled to ensure minimum 
of 80% yield. Those parameters define both the technology necessary to achieve those level (i.e., purification) and 
metrology necessary to monitor those parameters. In cases where metrology does not exist, it is required that the yield will 
be ensured by either tighter process control measures or by tight material quality control throughout associated supply chain, 
based on SEMI Standards. 
6. POTENTIAL SOLUTIONS 
6.1. GENERAL 
For pattern wafer inspection the requirements the next years will be to overcome issues of detection of the defects within 
the nuisance signal. This is correlated to the issue to obtain high sensitivity at high throughput. Major breakthroughs are 
required to achieve the required throughputs at roadmap sensitivities for yield ramp and volume production. The high aspect 
ratio inspection is still requiring for high yield at high throughput due to the high cost of ownership of the inspection tools. 
This also requires a good separation of the defect signals from the noise. The introduction of advanced lithography process 
using high energies has a potential to initiate chemical reactions and layer modification on the surface. Therefore, the 
detection of volatile and non-volatile organics is crucial. Currently, only synchrotron radiation-based facilities have the 

Potential Solutions  33 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
potential to analyze traces of non-volatile organic surface contamination. This is with respect to qualification and 
quantification.       
Critical Components—There is currently no means to measure particles smaller than 20nm from Critical Components.  The 
intent is to measure larger particles using existing technology and apply the Power Law to extrapolate smaller particle 
population.  The basis for the Power Law is the established relationship of particle size to population (concentration).  In 
statistics, a power law is a functional relationship between two quantities, where a relative change in one quantity results in 
a proportional relative change in the other quantity, independent of the initial size of those quantities: one quantity varies 
as a power of another.  In particles it is a logarithmic relation of size as particles get smaller.  There is a SEMI task force 
working on measurement and results interpretation for 10nm particles.  There will need to be ongoing work for <10nm 
particles.   
Surface Environment Control—As the list of ambient contaminants to be controlled broadens so must measurement 
capabilities. Affordable, accurate, repeatable, real-time sensors for non-particulate contamination are becoming 
increasingly necessary. The use of inert environments to transport and store wafers is expected to increase with process 
sensitivities. Pre-gate and pre-contact clean and salicidation are cited as processes to first require this capability. In addition, 
using inert environments offers the opportunity to reduce the introduction of moisture into vacuum load-lock tools, thereby 
decreasing contamination and load-lock pump-down times. While closed carrier purging systems exist and are evolving. 
Wet clean and etch, tool environments have also transitioned that may need to single-wafer and use of closed processing 
systems are becoming more prevalent for corrosion sensitive layers become inert, such as wet sink end-stations, present a 
challenge. As wafer isolation technologies evolve, design and material selection of carriers and enclosures will be critical 
for performance in isolating the wafers from the ambient and in not contributing contaminants themselves. In addition, the 
materials and designs must not promote cross-contamination between processes. Seal technology, low outgassing of volatile 
contaminants, and non-absorbing materials development are a key to effective wafer isolation deployment. 
6.2. SURFACE ENVIRONMENTAL CONTAMINATION CONTROL 
Process Equipment—Defect reduction in process equipment remains paramount to achieving defect density goals. Solutions 
and technology developments are required to provide major enhancement capabilities in the next years and continue to 
enable cost-effective high-volume manufacturing for device dimensions below 14 nm. New cleaning chemistries, in situ 
chamber monitoring, materials development, and other techniques including improved techniques of parts cleaning can 
help maintain chamber cleanliness run-to-run and dramatically reduce the frequency of chamber wet cleans. These 
developments will also act to increase equipment utilization. Reduced backside wafer contamination control must drive 
both measurement technology and fundamental changes in equipment. Metal/particle cross contamination from backside to 
next wafer front-side, hot spots/depth of focus in lithography, and punch through on electrostatic chucks are all examples 
of issues that must be addressed in future tools. Particle avoidance techniques (O-ring material selection, gas 
flow/temperature management, wafer chuck optimization) will continue to play a key role in meeting defect densities. It is 
believed that a more fundamental understanding of reactor contamination formation, transport, and deposition will be 
required to enhance current equipment and process design and aid in the placement and interpretation of data from in situ 
sensors. These fundamental physical, chemical, and plasma reactor contamination models must be employed. In situ process 
control will become increasingly important to reduce process-induced defects and to minimize requirements for post-
measurements. Intelligent process control at a tool requires a fundamental understanding of how parameters impact device 
performance. Open tool control systems that allow both users and equipment suppliers to easily integrate new sensor and 
new control software will be necessary to enable intelligent process control. 
Process critical materials— Further studies into device impact are necessary to validate any need for increased purities. 
System concerns such as corrosion potential may lead process concerns in seeking higher purities.  
In order to accelerate yield enhancement for processes that incorporate new materials, it is very desirable that development 
studies include purity data as much as is practical. Studies of new materials (e.g., for gate dielectrics) are initially concerned 
with basic process performance, and later with integration issues. During those stages of development contamination is a 
relatively minor concern. However, if no information is collected, later yield enhancement efforts proceed with inadequate 
technical basis. Collecting and reporting both environmental and material contamination data whenever practical will lead 
to long-term benefits. 
UPW—Effect of UPW quality to wafer defects for most advanced device geometries is unknown. Particles (including 
colloidal silica) are considered to be high risk. Potential solution for the particle control is due to reduction of the particle 
challenge in the final filters and application of the POU filtration, providing additional layer of protection. Use of SEMI 
C079 and SEMI C093 guides are recommended for the particle challenge reduction. Proactive colloidal silica control using 
frequent regeneration of the ion exchange resin is also recommended. 

34  Cross Teams 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
Although updated target levels for hydrogen peroxide have been defined, additional study is needed to better correlated 
process related issues with the level of H2O2 in UPW. 
Recycling and reclaiming initiatives must drive improvements in rapid online analytical technology, especially detection 
of organics, to ensure that POU-recycled UPW is equal or better than single-pass water. 
Chemicals—Figure YE-1 also shows various technological areas that may be required to enhance and measure the purity 
of delivered chemicals to the wafer manufacturing process.  
6.3. CHARACTERIZATION, INSPECTION AND ANALYSIS 
For the challenges of MEMS production, the potential solutions for infrared inspection of metal wafers will be to switch to 
other technologies like thermography, photoacoustic, or ultrasonic in the future. Possible solutions for critical dimension 
(CD) scanning electron microscopy (SEM) measurements under angle on silicon on glass could be the use of special 
structures, the use of reduced beam intensity, or the use of gas as option to discharge. 
7. CROSS TEAMS 
Yield Enhancement forum interacts with the teams that either provide definitions about defects and factors affecting 
manufacturing yield or can benefit from the information generated by the forum for their respective roadmap development. 
SECC forum of Yield Enhancement provides input into SEMI Standards development by triggering new standards 
development or existing standard updates in the areas associated with the respective technology challenges. The following 
diagram illustrated the cross-team linkage. 
 
Figure YE-10   Yield Enhancement IFT Cross Team Linkage Diagram 
Currently, most of the input into Yield Enhancement is coming from the More Moore IFT, helping to define defects for the 
most advanced and tightest critical dimension technologies. Additionally, Yield Enhancement works with the Metrology 
IFT to align on definitions of the required metrology sensitivity.  
Yield Enhancement IFT provides input to Factory integration, helping to define conditions in the factory enabling high 
yield production. 
8. EMERGING/DISRUPTIVE CONCEPTS AND TECHNOLOGIES 
8.1. DIRECTED SELF ASSEMBLY 
An emerging and disruptive technology that is expected to be increasingly important is directed self-assembly (DSA) and 
utilizing structured nano-materials. The impact for yield would be more emphasis on defects associated with nonuniformity 
in structure than in foreign materials or molecular impurities. 

Conclusions and Recommendations  35 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
9. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
Most advanced semiconductor technologies and particularly logic (the new yield technology driver) have reached the point 
when yield may become a constraining factor of the future shrinkage of the critical dimensions. This is due to the fact that 
the defect metrology of both critical substrates (wafer, mask, lithography optics, etc.) and materials has reached their limits. 
This affects the ability to prevent, predict, and control defects in the manufacturing facility. This requires new systematic 
approaches to continue enabling future technology in accordance with the IRDS roadmap definitions. Such new approaches 
should include combination of the following measures: 
• 
Proactive measurement of contamination control of the critical materials used throughout the supply chain; 
• 
Leveraging data analytics to correlate process variation in production with any deviations in critical parameters; 
• 
Employ prediction modeling and experimentation to help with decisions on the choice of the technologies and method 
of their applications at all levels of the manufacturing facility; 
• 
Standardize quality control using SEMI and other standards; 
• 
Take advantage of collaborative development in the industry via IRDS, SEMI, and other research institutions to drive 
most productive technology solutions related to the SECC. Assist emerging metrology to commercialize via 
benchmarking studies and independent third-party qualifications. 
For next steps, the Yield Enhancement IFT will continue focusing on the areas of the technology challenges as defined in 
this chapter. More detailed definition of the technology needs and challenges should help to address those needs. There is 
an increasing need in collaborative development that will require tighter interaction between the roadmap group within 
Yield IFT and other forums external to Yield. 
10. APPENDICES 
10.1.APPENDIX A—SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIALS 
Below is the list of supplemental materials and the links to them: 
Title 
File Name 
Proactive Particle Control in Ultrapure Water 
(UPW) in Silicon Wafer Cleaning Process, IRDS, 
2022 
WP_Proactive_Particle_Control_in_Ultrapure_Water_20
22.pdf 
Metals Spec in UPW, White Paper by Drew Sinha 
and Slava Libman 
Metals_WP.pdf 
Metal Contamination of Image sensors by 
Ultrapure Water in Silicon Wafer Cleaning 
Process White Paper by Drew Sinha and Slava 
Libman 
Me_WP_Image_Sensor_9_18_18.pdf 
Precursor Table 
1403_14rev2master_precursor_table.pdf 
 
 
 

36  Appendices 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
10.2.APPENDIX B—ACRONYMS 
Acronym/Abbreviation 
Definition 
ALD 
atomic layer deposition techniques 
AMC 
airborne molecular contamination 
APC 
airborne particular contamination 
APIMS 
atmospheric pressure ionized mass spectroscopy 
ATE 
automatic test equipment 
ATPG 
automatic test pattern generation 
BE 
back end 
CCCS 
critical contamination control specifications 
CDA 
clean dry air 
CIA 
characterization, inspection and analysis 
CMOS 
complementary metal-oxide semiconductor 
CMP 
chemical mechanical planarization 
CoO 
cost of ownership 
CPC 
condensation particle counter 
CRDS 
cavity ring-down spectroscopy 
CVD 
chemical vapor deposition 
DSA 
directed self assembly 
DUV 
deep ultraviolet 
EAP 
electrically active particle 
EMI 
electromagnetic interference 
ESA 
electrostatic attraction 
ESD 
electrostatic discharge 
EUV 
extreme ultraviolet 
FE 
front end 
FEP 
front end processes 
FID 
flame ionization detector 
FMEA 
failure mode and effects analysis 
FOUPs 
front opening unified pods 
FTIR 
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy 

Appendices  37 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
Acronym/Abbreviation 
Definition 
GC 
gas chromatography 
GCMS 
gas chromatography–mass spectrometry 
GFAAS 
graphite furnace atomic absorption spectroscopy 
HEPA 
high-efficiency particulate arrestance  
HMW 
high molecular weight 
HVM 
high volume manufacturing 
ICP-MS 
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry 
IMS 
ion mobility spectrometry 
IRDS 
International Roadmap for Devices and Systems 
ISO 
International Standards Organization 
LCOCD 
liquid chromatography: organic carbon detection 
LMW 
low molecular weight 
LPC 
laser particle counter 
MEMS 
microelectromechanical system 
MFC 
mass flow controller 
MPS 
mean particle size 
MS 
mass spectrometry 
NEXAF 
near edge x-ray absorption fine structure 
O=C=S 
type of chemical compound containing oxygen, carbon, and sulfur  
OEMs 
original equipment manufacturer 
pCMP 
post-CMP or post chemical mechanical planarization 
PID 
photo ionization detector 
POD 
point of delivery or point of distribution 
POE 
point of entry 
POP 
point of process 
POS 
point of supply 
POU 
point-of-use 
POUP 
POU purification 
ROI 
return on investment 
SAW 
surface acoustic wave 

38  Appendices 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
Acronym/Abbreviation 
Definition 
SECC 
surface environment contamination control 
SEM-EDS 
scanning electron microscopy - energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy 
SEMI 
Semiconductor Equipment and Materials International 
SMC 
surface molecular contaminant 
SMLY 
systematic mechanisms limited yield 
SPC 
statistical process control 
TD 
thermal desorption 
TEOS 
 Tetraethylorthosilicate 
TOC 
total organic carbon content 
ToF-SIMS 
time-of-flight - secondary ion mass spectroscopy 
UF 
ultra-filtration 
UPW 
ultrapure water 
UV 
Ultraviolet 
VC-D 
vibrational circular dichroism  
VMB 
valve manifold box 
VMP 
valve manifold post 
WECC 
wafer environment contamination control 
XCDA 
Extreme clean dry air 
XPS 
x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy 
YE 
Yield Enhancement 
 
 
 

References  39 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2022 
COPYRIGHT © 2022 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
 
11. REFERENCES 
1. 
S. Libman, S. Edmund, B. McIntosh, et al. UPW IRDS and SEMI: Reinforced Process of Enabling Advanced 
Existing and Future Semiconductor Technologies. UPW Micro Conference. Portland, OR. (2017). 
2. 
S. Libman, G. Van Schooneveld, B. McIntosh, et al. UPW IRDS and SEMI: Reinforced Process of Enabling 
Advanced Existing and Future Semiconductor Technologies. UPM Conference. Phoenix, AZ. (2019). 
3. 
Yield Enhancement, International Roadmap for Devices and Systems, 2018 edition (2019). IEEE. White Paper: 
Proactive Particle Control in Ultrapure Water (UPW) in Silicon Wafer Cleaning Process. Supplemental Materials, 
YE IRDS, 2018 (2019). 
4. 
SEMI F104 – Particle Test Method Guide for Evaluation of Components Used in Ultrapure Water and Liquid 
Chemical Distribution Systems. SEMI, 673 S. Milpitas Blvd., Milpitas, CA. 
5. 
SEMI C79-0113 - Guide to Evaluate the Efficacy of Sub-15 nm Filters Used in Ultrapure Water (UPW) Distribution 
Systems. SEMI, 673 S. Milpitas Blvd., Milpitas, CA. 
6. 
SEMI C93-0217 - Guide for Determining the Quality of Ion Exchange Resin Used in Polish Applications of 
Ultrapure Water System. SEMI, 673 S. Milpitas Blvd., Milpitas, CA. 
7. 
P. Herrling, P. Rychen, D, Starkel, and Keanan Cassidy. Nanoparticle profiling in a UPW Polishing Section by 
Different Monitoring Systems: Advanced Understanding of Sources and Sinks. UPM Conference. Austin, TX. 
(2018). 
8. 
G. Van Schooneveld and B. McIntosh, Understanding Particle Contribution from Components Used in Ultrapure 
Water and High-Purity Chemical Systems and Their Impact on Industry-Driven Particle Requirements.  Ultrapure 
Micro 2019, Phoenix, AZ  (2019) 
9. 
G. Van Schooneveld, SEMI C79 Task Force Technical Review, CT Associates, Eden Prairie, MN 55344 (2018) 
10. 
Proactive Contamination Control for Sub 10nm Particle in Advanced Semiconductor Manufacturing. 236th ECS 
Meeting. October 13-17, 2019, | Atlanta, GA 
11. 
SEMI F063. Guide For Ultrapure Water Used In Semiconductor Processing. SEMI, 673 S. Milpitas Blvd., Milpitas, 
CA. 
12. 
SEMI F061. Guide To Design And Operation Of A Semiconductor Ultrapure Water System. SEMI, 673 S. Milpitas 
Blvd., Milpitas, CA. 
13. 
Thompson, L. F.; Willson, C. G.; Bowden, M. J. Introduction to microlithography, 2nd ed.; American Chemical 
Society: Washington, DC, 1994. 
14. 
SEMI MF 1982-1103 (formerly ASTM 1982-99 
15. 
SEMI F057 – Specification for Polymer Materials and Components Used in Ultrapure Water and Liquid Chemical 
Distribution Systems 
16. 
SEMI. Standard Practices for the Development of Ship to Control Process Limits, 2008. 
17. 
Alvarez Jr, D.; Spiegelman, J.; Heinlein, E.; Ramos, C.; Holmes, R. J.; Shamsi, Z., New Chemical Vapor Delivery 
Systems for Surface Cleaning. Solid State Phenomena 2013, 195, 25–29. 
18. 
Norton, E. T.; Amato-Wierda, C., Kinetic and Mechanistic Studies of the Thermal Decomposition of Ti (N (CH3) 
2) 4 during Chemical Vapor Deposition by in Situ Molecular Beam Mass Spectrometry. Chemistry of materials 
2001, 13 (12), 4655–4660. 
19. 
Libman S., McIntosh B., Hadder D., Van Schooneveld G., UPW IRDS and SEMI Standards: Enabling Yield by Wet 
Processing Defect Control in Advanced Semiconductor Technologies. May/June 2018, Austin TX. 

