THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2023 
COPYRIGHT © 2023 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL  
ROADMAP  
FOR  
DEVICES AND SYSTEMS™ 
 
2023 UPDATE 
 
LITHOGRAPHY & PATTERNING 
 
 
THE IRDSTM IS DEVISED AND INTENDED FOR TECHNOLOGY ASSESSMENT ONLY AND IS WITHOUT REGARD TO ANY 
COMMERCIAL CONSIDERATIONS PERTAINING TO INDIVIDUAL PRODUCTS OR EQUIPMENT. 
 
 

ii 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2023 
COPYRIGHT © 2023 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in 
any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, 
creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component 
of this work in other works. 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2023 
COPYRIGHT © 2023 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
Table of Contents 
1. 
Executive Summary ............................................................................................ 1 
2. 
Overview  ........................................................................................................... 1 
2.1. 
Development of Roadmap ............................................................................. 1 
2.2. 
Lithography Drivers ........................................................................................ 1 
2.3. 
Trends since 2022 Lithography Roadmap ..................................................... 2 
3. 
EUV Challenges .................................................................................................. 2 
3.1. 
EUV Light Sources and Polarization control .................................................. 2 
3.2. 
High nA EUV Small Depth of Focus ............................................................... 2 
3.3. 
Stochastics ..................................................................................................... 3 
3.4. 
EUV Computational Lithography Capabilities ................................................ 3 
3.5. 
EUV masks .................................................................................................... 4 
3.6. 
Energy Efficiency ........................................................................................... 4 
4. 
Packaging and Lithography ................................................................................. 4 
5. 
Patterning Materials and Integration ................................................................... 5 
5.1. 
Patterning Materials ....................................................................................... 5 
5.2. 
Patterning Integration ..................................................................................... 6 
6. 
Long term Challenges (2028 and on) .................................................................. 8 
7. 
Conclusions ........................................................................................................ 9 
8. 
Acronyms/Abbreviations ................................................................................... 10 
9. 
References ........................................................................................................ 12 
 
List of Figures 
Figure LITH-1 Comparison between conventional and FSAV schemes (left 
side); materials roadmap vs node (right side) .................................... 7 
Figure LITH-2 COAG SAC integration scheme (left side), materials roadmap 
vs node (right side) ............................................................................. 7 
Figure LITH-3 Projected required improvement in defect rate per device and 
per level .............................................................................................. 8 
 
 
 

iv 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2023 
COPYRIGHT © 2023 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
Acknowledgments 
Mark Neisser, Harry Levinson, Anuja De Silva, Ted Fedynyshyn, Heiko Feldmann, David Fried, Zhenxing Han, 
Naoya Hayashi, Karey Holland, Erik Hosler, Koji Ichimura, Hidemi Ishiuchi, Dave Kyser, Michael Lercel, 
Ken McWilliams, Warren Montgomery, Seiji Nagahara, Kent Nakagawa, Tsuyoshi Nakamura, Shinji Okazaki, 
Danping Peng, Daniele Piumi, Yoshitake Shusuke, Walt Trybula, Takeo Watanabe, Jim Wiley, Robert Wright, 
Stefan Wurm, Nuo Xu 
We would like to thank SPIE for support of Lithography International Focus Team (IFT) meetings during the 
Advanced Lithography + Patterning Symposium.   
 

Executive Summary  1 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2023 
COPYRIGHT © 2023 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
LITHOGRAPHY AND PATTERNING 
1. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Lithography and patterning will continue to advance but face many challenges. High NA tools with 0.55 NA are projected to be 
introduced in 2024, but improvements are needed in light sources, tools, masks, materials, computational lithography, and control 
of stochastics to enable production use of these tools. Process windows are expected to be small, forcing the use of thinner resists 
and may also require improved process integration schemes. The smaller field size of the high NA tools is difficult for some 
product designs. This could spur the growth of high-performance packaging of many relatively small chips. Approaches to larger 
mask sizes that would enable bigger exposure fields are also under consideration. Improvements in resist and related materials 
will be needed, but even with improvements, dose-to-print will continue to increase in order to enable sufficient control of 
stochastic effects. Longer term, even higher NA EUV (“hyper NA”) could be developed, but this faces many technical challenges 
and could prove less effective than multiple patterning of 0.33 or 0.55 NA EUV. Chemically amplified resists will remain the 
workhorse resists up to at least the 1 nm logic node, but new varieties of resists based on metals, both wet and dry deposited, are 
showing promise. Energy efficiency and chemical safety are concerns as world environmental concern increases.  
The IRDS overall roadmap projects that chip area per device will shrink faster than critical dimensions. This is leading to the 
increased use of new patterning integration schemes that can reduce edge placement error (EPE) and enable closer together circuit 
features. Fully self-aligned vias and self-aligned via over active gates are two integration schemes that will see increased use in 
future advanced chip products. Self-aligned materials will have to show improved dielectric constants in the future and will 
require use of new techniques such as area selective deposition. Long term, the projected switch from scaling by shrinking devices 
to scaling by stacking device will lead to faster growth in the number of critical levels. It will also require decreasing the EUV 
defect rate per exposure level by roughly an order of magnitude each node, which is many times faster than current defect 
improvements per node.  
2. OVERVIEW 
Historically, improvements in lithography have been key enablers to make improved chip technologies. The International 
Roadmap for Devices and Systems (IRDS) Lithography roadmap predicts how current patterning capability can support future 
chip generations and where challenges and improvements are needed. It gives a roadmap of expected key lithography 
requirements. It is intended to be used by semiconductor industry participants, by industry analysts, and by researchers who want 
or need to know how the industry will evolve in the future and what challenges need to be addressed.  
This document is the 2023 update to the 2022 Lithography roadmap that was published last year. The basic tables are the same 
as from 2022. This update discusses how the trends and challenges discussed in the 2022 roadmap have evolved in the past years. 
In addition, this year the Lithography Roadmap has expanded its scope to include patterning technology and is now the 
Lithography and Patterning roadmap. We have added a section discussing projected changes in patterning. This roadmap will 
continue to cover both lithography and patterning in the future. 
2.1. 
DEVELOPMENT OF ROADMAP 
This roadmap was developed through consultation with an international team of lithography and patterning experts and review 
of publicly available literature and other available documents. The current contributing membership is shown in the 
acknowledgments. Contributing members come from Asia, Europe, and the United States and represent semiconductor, 
equipment, and material manufacturers, as well as research institutes. The IRDS overall roadmap and the More Moore focus 
team provide the device roadmap from which lithography requirements are derived. Through polls of the IRDS Lithography team 
members the key options, their timing and their key challenges are developed. The table and this document undergo internal 
review by the team and by the overall IRDS before publication.  
2.2. 
LITHOGRAPHY DRIVERS 
This roadmap projects future patterning needs and where the key challenges are. In the past, both logic and memory devices have 
driven improvements in patterning technology. Currently, high-performance logic devices are leading the way to smaller critical 
dimensions and driving the introduction of novel patterning technology. New DRAM devices are continuing to be introduced 
with smaller critical dimensions (CDs), but trail logic in smallest resolution. Flash memory is scaling using 3D structures that 
have relatively large CDs and does not need higher resolution patterning to make progress.  

EUV Challenges  2 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2023 
COPYRIGHT © 2023 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
2.3. 
TRENDS SINCE 2022 LITHOGRAPHY ROADMAP 
EUV lithography, which uses 13.5 nm wavelength light for imaging, is well established. Advanced logic products are dependent 
on it and DRAM makers have started high volume manufacturing. It has become clear that EUV will not replace multiple 
patterning. Both technologies will be used, and the choice of using multiple patterning or not will depend on level-specific details, 
yield, and cost. As logic dimensions continue to shrink, use of EUV double patterning is likely.  
As we describe below, the tradeoff between chip size and yield along with the high cost of leading-edge logic means that using 
smaller chips along with high performance packaging may be an alternative to large chip sizes. But interposers and high-
performance packaging can require large field or direct-write lithography. This need is spurring development of large field optical 
exposure tools and  direct writing tools, both optical and ebeam.  
3. EUV CHALLENGES 
Enhancing EUV is a key challenge for meeting the needs of the roadmap. EUV resists are discussed in the section below on 
patterning materials. Other challenges are as follows:  
3.1. 
EUV LIGHT SOURCES AND POLARIZATION CONTROL 
Sources of light have long been a challenge for EUV lithography. The wavelengths used for optical lithography were selected 
where there existed sources of high intensity light over narrow bandwidths. In contrast, the wavelength at which EUV lithography 
is practiced is based on the availability of multilayer reflectors with high reflectivity. As a consequence, it has been a challenge 
to develop reliable EUV light sources with enough power to achieve cost-effective scanner throughput while providing 
sufficiently high doses to avoid yield losses due to photon shot noise.  
Nevertheless, laser-produced plasma (LPP) EUV light sources are currently used routinely for EUV lithography in HVM. Light 
power of 600 W at intermediate focus under dose-controlled conditions has been achieved, and there are efforts to increase this 
to 1 kW. Reliability also continues to improve. As output power increases, so does the amount of electricity required to produce 
the light. There are several options for reducing the amount of electricity consumed. Infrared lasers with wavelengths shorter 
than that produced by the CO2 lasers used currently in LPP light sources may provide better efficiency in converting electricity 
to infrared light and for converting infrared light to EUV light.  
Alternatively, free-electron lasers (FELs) offer the ability to scale both power and wavelength according to the requirements of 
lithography for the foreseeable future. An FEL lithography light source suitable for use in high-volume manufacturing must meet 
requirements for “per photon cost” (both in operational expense as well as environmental impact), either by powering multiple 
tools simultaneously or scaling the accelerator size. FELs can provide polarized light,1 which may be needed to enable hyper-
NA lithography. Solutions are needed for reducing the high coherence of light produced by FELs,2, with polarization and 
coherence being freely tunable for individual exposure tools. For implementations where single FELs power multiple exposure 
tools, methods are needed for handling high total beam power. Moreover, availability of the light source must approach 100%, 
and any interrupts must be quickly recoverable.  
3.2. 
HIGH NA EUV  KEY CHALLENGES 
Lithographic technologies have long been extended by increases of numerical aperture, and prototype high-NA EUV lithography 
tools are currently being fabricated by ASML (with 0.55 NA optics made by Carl Zeiss) and will be available for early use by 
chip makers in 2024. Because of the limited range of angles over which the multi-layers on the mask have high reflectance, the 
lens reduction in the scan direction is increased to 8×, while maintaining a reduction of 4× in the perpendicular direction. This 
results in a maximum exposure field size on wafers of 26 mm × 16.5 mm, half that of current scanner field sizes, as long as the 
current mask size is maintained. This has implications for fabricating large area chips, as well as for scanner throughput. One 
solution for making large dies is the stitching of two separate exposures, although this approach introduces a number of technical 
challenges, several of which are unique to EUV lithography.3 Larger masks that can support a 26 mm × 33 mm field on the wafer 
have also been proposed. The length in the scan direction would have to increase by a factor of two. Currently 12 in x 6 in masks 
are being considered but other form factors are possible. Making such masks will require considerable development and retooling 
for mask-making, but require no fundamental changes in mask making technology.  
Additional challenges (exclusive of those related to building the complex optics and exposure tools) for high-NA EUV 
lithography are summarized in the following table. Some of these challenges are already being addressed for EUV lithography 
at NA = 0.33, but will need to be extended for use at higher NA. Existing problems continue as challenges in part because of 
tighter requirements for edge placement errors that accompany future smaller features. Many of the key challenges are connected. 
For example, computational lithography is made complex by reduced depths-of-focus, the need to include resist stochastics as 

EUV Challenges  3 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2023 
COPYRIGHT © 2023 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
part of process variation, and (potentially) multiple mask absorbers to address mask 3D effects. The key challenge of stochastics 
is discussed in the next section.  
Table LITH-1    
The Key Challenges of High-NA (0.55) EUV Lithography 
Resists meeting resolution requirements, with low levels of defects from 
stochastic phenomena and pattern collapse 
Light sources that can support photon shot noise and productivity 
requirements 
Solutions for meeting small depths-of-focus at 0.55 NA 
Computational lithography capabilities 
Mask making and metrology infrastructure, including new absorber 
materials 
Solutions for large dies 
Cost of high-NA EUV lithography 
 
Longer term, EUV could be further extended by developing tools with an NA higher than 0.55, and hyper-NA systems (NA ≥ 
0.75) are under consideration. Shorter wavelengths (6 nm <  < 7 nm) are also being assessed. This is sometimes referred to as 
Beyond EUV (BEUV). A hyper-NA tool would use much of the infrastructure already in place for current EUV lithography, 
although some modification of the multilayers on the masks would be required. Polarized light could improve image-quality 
further, and enable the full potential of EUV optics for NA ≥ 0.75. Since current EUV light sources produce unpolarized light, 
new technology will need to be introduced for producing polarized light. The depth-of-focus will also be very small for hyper-
NA imaging and this would drive resist thicknesses below 20 nm. Such thin films are expected to drive metrology challenges. 
These challenges are discussed in the IRDS metrology roadmap. As discussed below, thinner resists also provide pattern transfer 
challenges and materials challenges.  
Changing to a shorter wavelength would be a much bigger change than increased NA and be much more challenging, although 
shorter wavelength lithography would have larger depths-of-focus than hyper-NA at  = 13.5 nm for the same resolution. New 
light sources, multilayer coatings and photoresists would be needed for shorter wavelength lithography. Maintaining the same 
level of photon shot noise at the shorter wavelength would require a doubling of light energy delivered to the wafer, which would 
greatly increase the heating of masks and mirrors in the projection optics.  
3.3. 
STOCHASTICS 
Stochastics refers to random factors that result in printed features that vary randomly from instance to instance. For example, 
stochastic variations in imaging dose can result in printing contact holes of different sizes even when the mask features are of 
identical size. Stochastic variations result from random variations in the imaging and patterning processes. They can result in 
poor pattern quality, such as line width roughness or poor CD uniformity, and they can result in actual pattern defects, such as 
missing or bridged features. Stochastic effects get worse as feature sizes shrink and the need to manage stochastic effects is a 
challenge for EUV lithography. In the 2022 roadmap we projected that dose to print would have to increase about 3 fold in four 
nodes in order to address stochastic issues and enable printed EUV features to meet critical dimension uniformity requirements.4 
So far, this prediction is on track. Stochastic effects also get worse as resist films get thinner and are worse if the resist film 
absorbs less light. Since resist films have to get thinner to accommodate the small depth of focus projected for EUV high NA, 
this will force increasing resist absorbance and, as discussed below, wider use of metal based resists. 
3.4. 
EUV COMPUTATIONAL LITHOGRAPHY CAPABILITIES 
Given the small depth of focus projected for advanced EUV capabilities (high-NA EUV with NA@0.55 and hyper-NA EUV 
with NA@0.75), the co-optimization of mask, projection optics and illumination is more important and challenging than ever. 
As discussed below, not only will advanced optical proximity correction (OPC) be used, but curvilinear masks are desired or 
required. The normal trend is that more data is needed every mask generation because of smaller feature sizes and more 
complicated assist features, but the advent of curvilinear features and the growing use of inverse lithography technology (ILT) 
has the potential to multiply mask data volumes over tenfold. This will put stress on every element of the computational 

Packaging and Lithography  4 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2023 
COPYRIGHT © 2023 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
lithography path and the mask data processing and making flow. It will stimulate new approaches such as artificial intelligence 
or greater use of dedicated chips such as graphics coprocessors to speed up computation and the adoption of a new mask data 
format such as multigon as an extension to the traditional P39 oasis standard.  
3.5. 
EUV MASKS 
The need for more complex and curvilinear patterns has led to long writing times in mask manufacturing. Multi-beam mask 
writers, which have been in practical use for several years, help to address this problem. On the other hand, the measurement 
technology for evaluating the transfer characteristics of patterned masks still has many issues, including its cost efficiency, and 
there also are concerns about bright-field masks, sub-resolution assist features, and defect control. Furthermore, the practical 
application of a pellicle with sufficient transmittance and long life for EUVL is also an issue. For the high-NA era of EUVL, 
since an anamorphic optical system will be used, the mask reduction ratio changes in one direction and the pattern effective area 
is limited, so it is necessary to consider increasing the mask size and/or stitching multiple masks to print large die sizes. In 
addition, it is also necessary to develop new mask absorber materials and processes to reduce mask 3D effects and obtain higher 
pattern resolution and fidelity on wafer. 
3.6. 
ENERGY EFFICIENCY 
Energy usage and other resource consumption is more and more a concern in the world. Semiconductor manufacturing consumes 
significant energy and in some cases is a measurable portion of the total power consumption of a nation. The IRDS ESH&S team 
is assessing energy and water consumption and the effect on the environment by fabs and is extrapolating future usage in order 
to identify where consumption can be reduced. The industry is already sensitive to the cost per transistor for each successive 
device node. Now an additional question is whether the increased device density and chip performance is outpacing the use of 
energy, water, and other resources used by fabs.  
Lithography is the second major consumer of power after the facility requirements. EUV lithography usage is growing and can 
be a major consumer of energy. The lithography and patterning team is working with the ESH team to understand the overall 
impact of increasing EUV usage on power consumption. The assessment is complicated because even though increased EUV 
use increases energy consumption, replacement of multiple patterning by EUV single exposures tends to reduce patterning levels 
and this can reduce energy consumption.  
The Lithography Energy Sub-Group is working to develop a methodology that considers the various power requirements for the 
equipment employed in the complete lithography process employing the throughput and energy consumption of these tools, and 
the resultant yielded devices based on the process flows for various nodes.  
The current status is that the Energy Sub-Group has process flows for simpler nodes and has developed the methodology for 
calculating Litho power consumption per node based on the identified process flow and the typical equipment power 
requirements. The next steps in the overall process include obtaining detailed equipment model numbers (to obtain specific 
energy consumption) as well as yielded throughput. 
There is an ongoing effort to provide a comparison of multi-level optical exposure process flow to compare with single mask 
EUV process flow. This adds to the complexity due to the difference in the manufacturing processing between optical and EUV 
masks. 
The plan is to report the status of the model and results of these investigations in the full 2024 roadmap update.  
4. PACKAGING AND LITHOGRAPHY  
Advanced packaging is pertinent to patterning in several ways, as follows: 
• 
Patterning is used directly in packaging processes 
• 
The overall lithographic impact on system costs can be reduced by the use of advanced packaging 
• 
Advanced packaging can potentially be used to address problems resulting from the field size of high-NA EUV systems 
• 
Advanced packaging also provides an alternative to device stacking and the resulting stringent defect density 
requirements  
Advanced packaging is already used to reduce the impact of lithography on system cost, by means of disaggregation. In this 
approach, the parts of a circuit that can be shrunk using very advanced lithography, such logic cells and memory, are fabricated 
separately from other parts of the circuit, such as input/output devices, which can be produced using much less expensive 
patterning technology. The separately fabricated parts of the circuit (sometimes called chiplets) are then integrated by means of 

Patterning Materials and Integration  5 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2023 
COPYRIGHT © 2023 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
advanced packaging.5 6 With this approach, the benefits of scaling with advanced lithography is optimized. There is a tradeoff 
between the cost of the advanced packaging and the cost savings due to making chiplets instead of larger chips. The use of high 
NA EUV, where large chips are harder to make because of the smaller exposure field, may push this tradeoff more in the direction 
of smaller chips being used together with high performance packaging.  
Advanced packaging requires substrates, often called interposers, which are big enough for several chips to be placed side by 
side and which contain interconnect lines and chip connection sites. Patterning technology is used to create the connection 
patterns. Packaging substrates can have considerable topography or be warped, with substrates warped 100’s of microns or more, 
resulting in a lithographic challenge for chucking and focusing. Large packages and substrates may be involved, requiring either 
large-field exposure tools or direct write systems. For example, the LGA 6096 package area is more than 70 mm on a side. A 
common substrate size for packaging is 510 x 515 mm, which can support even large packages. There are engineering challenges 
for either large-field exposure tools or direct write systems, particularly as the features in advanced packages shrink well below 
one micron. Etch processes capable of producing very high aspect ratio structures, such as through-silicon vias, are needed.  
5. PATTERNING MATERIALS AND INTEGRATION 
The Patterning Integration Roadmap is driven by the need to reduce variability and still support electrical performance. A major 
figure of merit for variability is edge placement error (EPE). EPE is defined as the sum of terms taking care of local variability 
(LER/LWR, LCDU) and global variability (overlay).7 This section is split into two main components: 
• 
Patterning Materials: Resist Platforms and assist materials specifically defined to mitigate local variability components 
of EPE 
• 
Patterning Integration: Integration schemes and required materials defined to mitigate global variability components of 
EPE 
5.1. 
PATTERNING MATERIALS 
Patterning materials remain a key challenge for extending scaling. Along with continuous resist development, co-optimization 
of the underlayer and patterning stack are necessary for improved patterning performance. Chemically amplified resists (CARs) 
will remain the workhorse for the 1-nm node, with both single and double patterning options for critical device and metal levels. 
CARs have seen significant improvements in  material stochastics.8 They are designed with smaller building blocks with 
strategies to reduce the distribution variability of its multi components. Their chemistry is studied in detail to improve the 
quantum yield by maximizing the number of useful chemical interactions with absorbed photons.9 Both spin on and deposited 
underlayers are being tuned to optimize the resist-underlayer interaction with respect to stochastic defects and pattern transfer.10 
Enhancements in bake and track hardware play a significant role in new post exposure bake and developer solutions for the 
extendibility of CAR with resolution and uniformity improvements.11 Pattern transfer of CAR to underlying hard mask is another 
active area of development. New descum chemistries, topographical and chemical selective deposition strategies, atomic layer 
based etch techniques have been effective in mitigating stochastic defects formed at lithography.12 13 
Advanced hard mask (HM) materials are being proposed as well, with intrinsic properties designed for mitigating pattern fidelity 
loss (i.e., post etch LER and dimensional loss). Especially important are the HM materials used for low-k ILD etch, where the 
minimum pitch in device is patterned. As plasma vapor deposited (PVD) TiN seems to be approaching its capability cliff as pitch 
approaches 20 nm resolution, a new concept is being explored, namely Ti-free options or plasma enhanced atomic layer 
deposition (PEALD) TiN, that enables much more tunability of the film properties hence mitigating LER via stress and 
crystallinity control.14 
Despite these material advancements coupled with imaging improvements, CAR will face challenges for around 2-1.5 nm node. 
Some reports are appearing that CAR resists are not keeping up with the progress of metal oxide resists (MOR) for lines and 
spaces, although they keeping up in contact hole performance15 and substantial progress is being made in MOR process 
development16 17. Recent data at aggressive single exposure limits on NXE:3400 scanner indicate that CARs are likely to have 
higher defects and low sensitivity at sub-28 nm pitch resolution.18 The aspect ratio at sub-28 nm pitch scale would require 
thinning of resist thickness which would have negative consequences in roughness and line break defects. Resist suppliers are 
already working towards these challenges with emerging resist designs. Simplified resist chemistries to limit stochastics, bound 
photo chemical components and alternate developers could be approaches that make CAR competitive at higher resolution. 
Although the mainstream of CAR development process is positive tone wet development (PTD) using TMAH developer, 
negative tone wet developer is showing improvement in resolution and roughness with newly introduced hydrophobic 
developer.19  

Patterning Materials and Integration  6 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2023 
COPYRIGHT © 2023 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
With high photon absorption that could translate to higher sensitivity, metal oxide resists are the biggest competitor to CAR.20 21 
The insertion point for these new materials is expected to be for the 1.5 nm node and beyond. While some potential applications 
in 0.33 NA double patterning can be foreseen, the differentiator for MOR will be with high NA 0.55 EUV insertion. With higher 
resolution capability, MOR will be expected to resolve two dimensional (tip-to-tip) structures, which will enable single exposure 
and a reduction in the needed number of EUV masks. Continuous improvement to MOR platforms will be expected with 
increasing quantum yield to improve roughness and defectivity without compromise on dose. Track based edge bead removal 
and backside/bevel clean options, which have become standard processes to address metal contamination, will continue to evolve. 
As a new class of resists, understanding the effects of the environment and process delays on their stability remains a significant 
focus for MOR. For high NA lithography, which will require stitching to accommodate a single die being printed in subsequent 
exposures, CD stability control will be critical.22 New types of process flows with resist coat, exposure, bake and develop steps 
being de-integrated are being considered for MOR.23 Characterizing the effect of these new methods and their impact on resist 
performance is a near term industry focus. 
Both wet and dry development are being considered for MOR. While wet development leverages existing eco-system from CAR, 
new hardware improvements are needed to optimize the performance for MOR.24 Both dry deposited and dry developed resists 
are new candidates in the industry. A new coater/developer-based development method was introduced recently for MOR 
development for improving resolution, roughness, sensitivity, pattern collapse and defectivity. 25 Dry development has the 
advantage of enabling higher aspect ratio without pattern collapse. Tuning of underlayer and pattern transfer techniques for MOR 
is also a significant area of development that can enhance its performance.26 
Directed self-assembly technology is being evaluated or used for device manufacturing in logic, memory, and CMOS sensors.27 
28 29 DSA is used to make repeated smooth fine pitch patterns from rough initial patterns with reasonable cost of ownership. 
Pattern reshaping techniques have been announced and will likely be used in future to target small sub-resolution feature on 
specific typology or layouts; although beneficial and supporting an important need such as lithography cost reduction through 
the patterning of line gratings and tip-to-tip in a single exposure, they are not expected to change the above-described picture in 
term of materials and development techniques capabilities.30  
Another impending challenge is the possibility of more stringent regulations of fluorine containing chemicals, including possible 
bans on their use. Some lithography materials contain fluorine and do not have available substitutes.31 Please see the IRDS 
ESH&S roadmap for more details about this. 
5.2. 
PATTERNING INTEGRATION 
As minimum pitch in devices progressively keeps scaling, margin for EPE becomes smaller, leading to extra complexity in the 
patterning space.  
EPE components are well identified and known,7 each one having its own roadmap for making sure enough EPE budget is 
available at each technology node. Numerical simulations have been published that estimate the process parameters EPE is most 
sensitive to, with overlay taking 40% of the budget, and LER being responsible for 25%.32 
To enhance the process window for overlay, hence mitigating EPE, several self-alignment techniques have been proposed,33 
leveraging specific new process integration schemes. The key philosophy is to make use of multi-colored etch contrast along 
with advanced etch systems for improved selectivity, to decrease the sensitivity of final dimensions and placement on actual 
misalignment. These techniques go under the name of design-technology co-optimization (DTCO) or scaling boosters. The first 
DTCO technique ever adopted has been self-aligned blocks (SAB), leveraging the ABACA colored scheme.34 
DTCO is also important for enabling the correct node-to-node die area scaling, as minimum pitch approaches 20 nm and below. 
Specifically, DTCO and self-alignment techniques are adopted to enable new layout strategies aimed to deliver a more compact 
device design, hence enabling die area scaling faster than critical dimension scaling and avoid unacceptable RC delay increases.35 
We define Patterning Integration as the branch of patterning techniques and material roadmaps specifically developed for 
enabling advanced DTCO techniques. Among the many options currently in the pipeline (supervias, semidamascene, fully self-
aligned contacts…), the two most relevant for patterning integration in upcoming nodes are discussed below, along with a 
roadmap for material properties: 
1. Fully self-aligned vias (FSAV) 
2. Self-aligned contact over active gate (SAC for COAG) 

Patterning Materials and Integration  7 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2023 
COPYRIGHT © 2023 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
5.2.1. FULLY SELF-ALIGNED VIAS  
FSAV technique consist in the creation of an ABAB multi-colored patterning scheme with “A” being the underlying metal and 
“B” being an extra-dielectric permanent material used for self-aligning the etch; this enables printing larger vias at Litho level, 
with enhanced overlay budget, and will also create a longer leaky path between the via and the adjacent non-connected metal 
line, hence improving device reliability. 
Figure LITH-3 reports the process flow scheme of the conventional flow (control flow) versus the FSAV flow, with the self-
alignment materials being reported in dark blue; it also reports the estimated properties of the self-alignment materials for selected 
pitch estimated under the assumption of constant node-to-node RC delay. 
 
Figure LITH-1    
Comparison between conventional and FSAV schemes (left side); materials roadmap vs node (right side) 
It has been demonstrated that FSAV scheme vs control flow can significantly increase the overlay budget36 and it will be a key 
technology for enabling roadmap beyond 2 nm node. 
Self-alignment material dielectric constant will have to scale along with pitch scaling, to avoid a too high RC penalty associated 
with the FSAV scheme. The best materials for high etch selectivity typically have high dielectric constant. 
Self-alignment materials are deposited by area selective atomic layer deposition (ASD), emerging technology that use the surface 
energy difference between adjacent materials for depositing on one and not on the other. In the specific case, a dielectric-on-
dielectric (DoD) ASD is required. FSAV is expected to be required from pitch 20 nm. 
5.2.2. SELF-ALIGNED CONTACT OVER ACTIVE GATE (SAC FOR COAG) 
COAG enables a more contact and design-efficient layout for the cell, with the gate contact not requiring dummy gates to 
minimize the risk of shorts with the source and drain contacts.37 The concept is based on multi-colored selectivity scheme, as 
reported in Figure LITH-4. 
 
Figure LITH-2    
COAG SAC integration scheme (left side), materials roadmap vs node (right side) 
An ABCBA pattern must be created, where “A” is a material capping source/drain (S/D) contacts, “B” is the low-k spacer and 
“C” is a dielectric gate cap. Spacer width (B) defines the need of a self-alignment scheme adoption, with a threshold being 
tentatively set at 6 nm. To form the two different families of contact (on gate and on source/drain, VCG and VCT respectively 
in the common nomenclature), two dedicated masks and exposure steps are needed, each followed by an etch step that selectively 
opens A or B. 
 Self-alignment A and C materials are permanent in the device, as they are removed only where the contact has to be created, so 
they must scale their dielectric constant as CPP scales, to minimize their impact on RC delay. The table in Figure LITH-4 reports 

Long term Challenges (2028 and on)  8 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2023 
COPYRIGHT © 2023 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
a roadmap defined under the assumption of constant RC factor node-to-node, with some examples of materials fulfilling the 
requirement. 
The multi-colored patterning scheme can be generated by recessing S/D and gate materials, then depositing in the gap and 
planarizing, or by dielectric-on-metal (DoM) ASD. While the Recess+ Gapfill approach makes use of conventional technologies, 
it leads to an increase in the aspect ratios to deal with during the several process steps. Area selective deposition is expected to 
be a strong enabler for COAG SAC in the future, as well as for all the other DTCO techniques that will be developed and 
implemented. 
6. LONG TERM CHALLENGES (2028 AND ON) 
Long term, the IRDS roadmap projects that logic devices will switch to scaling by stacking instead of scaling by shrinking. This 
will create a large increase in the number of EUV levels. Since the EUV levels are the critical levels, one can project they will 
generate most of the lithography defects after the process is ramped up. Taking the required defect densities for each node and 
calculating the defect densities required of each critical level to meet this target, one can project required defect density by level. 
As show in Figure LITH-5, with the use of multiple tiers of devices, defect densities will need to decrease by orders of magnitude 
in order to maintain yield. The chart assumes that defect densities in 2022 just meet requirement and 2022 defect density is 
normalized to one. Should such a rapid decrease in defect densities not be achievable, moving to smaller die sizes and using 
advanced packaging integration to integrate the smaller chips could be a route to better yield.  
 
 
Figure LITH-3    
Projected required improvement in defect rate per device and per level 
 
 

Conclusions  9 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2023 
COPYRIGHT © 2023 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
7. CONCLUSIONS 
EUV at 0.33 NA is well established now. Extensions to EUV are in development and higher NA tools are expected to be available 
starting in 2024. There are many challenges to adopting high NA EUV, including small process windows, mask making, 
stochastic effects and defects. High NA will bring smaller exposure field sizes with it. This may spur the growth of advanced 
packaging and/or larger mask sizes. The slowdown in CD scaling compared to circuit area scaling requires the implementation 
of advanced DTCO to reduce circuit size more than CD shrinks. Materials will have to be improved to support new device nodes. 
Not only will resists have to improve, but improvements are also needed in underlayers, pattern quality improvement processes 
such as DSA based processes, and pattern transfer processes. Leading edge resist technology is mostly based on chemically 
amplified materials, but metal based resists and some dry deposited resists show promise both in being able to work at low film 
thicknesses and in process integration schemes. Techniques such as fully self-aligned vias and self-aligned contact over active 
gate will be essential to do this. Long term, the projected switch to scaling by stacking from scaling by shrinking will require 
much faster improvements in EUV defect rates. Defect rates per EUV level will need to decrease roughly an order of magnitude 
per node instead decreasing 20% or less each node.  
 
 

Acronyms/Abbreviations  10 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2023 
COPYRIGHT © 2023 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
8. ACRONYMS/ABBREVIATIONS 
Term  
Definition 
ArF 
Argon fluoride 
ASD 
Area selective atomic layer deposition 
BEUV 
Beyond EUV 
CARS 
Chemically amplified resists 
CD 
Critical dimension 
CDU 
Critical dimension uniformity 
CMOS 
Complementary metal oxide semiconductor 
COAG 
Contact over active gate 
CoO 
Cost of ownership 
CVD 
Chemical vapor deposition 
DOD 
Dielectric on dielectric 
DOM 
Dielectric on metal 
DRAM 
Dynamic random access memory 
DSA 
Directed self-assembly 
DTCO 
Design-technology co-optimization 
EPE 
Edge replacement error 
ESH&S 
Environment, safety, health and sustainability 
EUV 
Extreme ultraviolet 
FEL 
Free electron laser 
FET 
Field effect transistor 
FinFET 
Fin field-effect transistor 
FSAV 
Fully self-aligned vias 
GAA 
Gate all around 
GPU 
Graphic processing unit 
HM 
Hard mask 
HVM 
High volume manufacturing 
I/O 
Input/output 
IC 
Integrated circuit 
IEEE 
Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers  
IEEE-SA 
IEEE Standards Association 
IFT 
International focus team 
IMEC 
Interuniversity Microelectronics Centre 
ILD 
Interlevel dielectric 
iNEMI 
International Electronics Manufacturing Initiative 
I/O 
Input/output 
IRC 
International roadmap committee 
IRDS 
International Roadmap for Devices and Systems 
ISSCC 
International Solid-State Circuits Conference 
ITRS 
International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors 
KrF 
Krypton fluoride 
LCDU 
Local CD uniformity 

Acronyms/Abbreviations  11 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2023 
COPYRIGHT © 2023 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
LER 
Line edge roughness 
LGAA 
Lateral gate all around  
LPP 
Laser-produced plasma 
LWR 
Line width roughness 
MEMS 
Micro-electro mechanical system 
MRAM 
Magnetic RAM 
MOR 
Metal oxide resist 
MOS 
Metal oxide semiconductor 
MOSFET 
Metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistor 
MPU 
Microprocessor unit 
MRAM 
Magnetic RAM 
Mx 
Tight-pitch routing metal interconnect 
NA 
Numerical aperture 
NAND 
A logic gate (NOT-AND) that produces an output that is 
false only if all its inputs are true 
NIL 
Nanoimprint lithography 
OPC 
Optical proximity correction 
ORSC 
Overall roadmap system characteristics 
ORTC 
Overall roadmap technology characteristics 
OSC 
Outside System Connectivity 
PEALD 
Plasma enhanced atomic layer deposition 
PVD 
Plasma vapor deposition 
PTD 
Positive tone wet development 
RIE 
Reactive ion etch 
SAB 
Self-aligned blocks 
SAC 
Self-aligned contacts 
S/D 
Source/drain 
SDRJ 
System Device Roadmap Committee of Japan 
SEM 
Scanning electron microscope 
VGAA 
Vertical gate all around 
VLSI 
Very large scale integration 
 
 

References  12 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2023 
COPYRIGHT © 2023 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
9. REFERENCES 
 
1 H. Kawata, N. Nakamura, H. Sakai, R. Kato, and R. Hajima. "High power light source for future extreme ultraviolet lithography based on 
energy-recovery linac free-electron laser." Journal of Micro/Nanopatterning, Materials, and Metrology 21, no. 2 (2022): 021210-
021210. 
2 W. A. Barletta, J. Bisognano, J. N. Corlett, P. Emma, Z. Huang, K-J. Kim, R. Lindberg et al. "Free electron lasers: Present status and future 
challenges." Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated 
Equipment 618, no. 1-3 (2010): 69-96. 
3 V. Wiaux, J. Bekaert, T. Kovalevich, J. Ryckaert, E. Hendrickx, N. Davydova, P. Woltgens et al. "Stitching enablement for anamorphic 
imaging: a~ 1μm exclusion band and its implications." In Extreme Ultraviolet Lithography 2020, vol. 11517, pp. 76-83. SPIE, 2020 
4 https://irds.ieee.org 
5 H. J. Levinson, "Technological innovations for a sustainable business model in the semiconductor industry," Proc. SPIE 9189, p. 91890E 
(2014) 
6 S. Naffziger, N. Beck, T. Burd, K. Lepak, G. H. Loh, M. Subramony, and S. White. "Pioneering chiplet technology and design for the amd 
epyc™ and ryzen™ processor families: Industrial product." In 2021 ACM/IEEE 48th Annual International Symposium on Computer 
Architecture (ISCA), pp. 57-70. IEEE, 2021. 
7 Jan Mulkens et. al., "Patterning control strategies for minimum edge placement error in logic devices", Proc. SPIE 10145, Metrology, 
Inspection, and Process Control for Microlithography XXXI, 1014505 (28 March 2017) 
8 Toru Fujimori , “Recent status of the stochastic issues of photoresist materials in EUV lithography”, Proceedings Volume 12292, 
International Conference on Extreme Ultraviolet Lithography 2022; 122920F (2022). 
9 Takahiro Kozawa, “Defect risk in chemically amplified resists used for extreme ultraviolet lithography”, Proceedings Volume PC12292, 
International Conference on Extreme Ultraviolet Lithography 2022; PC122920 (2022) 
10 Roberto Fallica,  “Scaling and readiness of underlayers for high-numerical aperture extreme ultraviolet lithography”, Journal of 
Micro/Nanopatterning, Materials, and Metrology, Vol. 21, Issue 4, 044601 (2022) 
11 Kanko Kato et al., Coater/developer based techniques to achieve sub-30nm CAR process on EUV stack 
Proceedings Volume PC12055, Advances in Patterning Materials and Processes XXXIX; PC120550L (2022) 
https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2613805d 
12 Xun Xiang et al., “Introduction of pre-etch deposition techniques in EUV patterning”, Proceedings Volume 10589, Advanced Etch 
Technology for Nanopatterning VII; 105890K (2018) 
13 Katie Lutker Lee et al., “Plasma-based area selective deposition for extreme ultraviolet resist defectivity reduction and process window 
improvement”, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B 40, 032204 (2022) 
14 A. Turnquist et al., “Evaluation of TiN hardmask films to prevent line wiggling due to plasma-induced film stress”, Proceedings Volume 
12499, Advanced Etch Technology and Process Integration for Nanopatterning XII; 1249904 (2023) 
15 Florian Gstrein, "Material and patterning innovation: the foundation for Moore’s law extension," Proc. SPIE PC12497, Novel Patterning 
Technologies 2023, PC1249704 (30 April 2023); https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2669519 
16 Lior Huli, Kanzo Kato, Steven Gueci, Nathan Antonovich, Steven Grzeskowiak, David Hetzer, Eric Liu, Alexandra Krawicz, Satoru 
Shimura, Shinichiro Kawakami, Soichiro Okada, Karen Petrillo, Luciana Meli, Nicholas Latham, Yasiel Cabrera, Belle Antonovich, 
"Optimization of spin-on metal oxide resist performance via new development techniques on sub-30nm pitch patterning," Proc. SPIE 
12498, Advances in Patterning Materials and Processes XL, 1249822 (30 April 2023); https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2658880 
17 Kanzo Kato, Lior Huli, Nathan Antonovich, David Hetzer, Steven Grzeskowiak, Eric Liu, Akiteru Ko, Satoru Shimura, Shinichiro 
Kawakami, Takahiro Kitano, Seiji Nagahara, Luciana Meli, Indira Seshadri, Martin Burkhardt, Karen Petrillo, "Coater/developer-
based techniques to achieve tight pitches towards high-NA EUV," Proc. SPIE 12498, Advances in Patterning Materials and Processes 
XL, 1249821 (30 April 2023); https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2657290 
18 Arame Thiam et al.,  “Towards high NA patterning readiness: materials, processes and etch transfer for P24 Line Space”, Proceedings 
Volume 11854, 118540A (2021)  
19 Keiyu Ou, et al., “A novel formulated developer for negative-tone imaging with EUV exposure to improve chemical stochastic”, 
Proceedings Volume 12498, Advances in Patterning Materials and Processes XL; 124980D (2023) 
20 Stephen Meyers et al., “MOx resist formulation and process advances towards high-NA EUV lithography”, Proceedings Volume 12498, 
Advances in Patterning Materials and Processes XL; 1249804 (2023). 
21 Rich Wise et al., “Breaking stochastic tradeoffs with a dry deposited and dry developed EUV photoresist system”, Proceedings Volume 
11612, Advances in Patterning Materials and Processes XXXVIII; 1161203 (2021) 
 

References  13 
 
THE INTERNATIONAL ROADMAP FOR DEVICES AND SYSTEMS:  2023 
COPYRIGHT © 2023 IEEE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
 
22 Sangjin Kim etal., “An investigation on the process control for the solid application of EUV MOR, Proceedings Volume 12494, Optical 
and EUV Nanolithography XXXVI; 124940V (2023 
23 Andreia Santos et al., “Scaling and readiness of underlayers for high-numerical aperture extreme ultraviolet lithography”, Proceedings 
Volume PC12292, International Conference on Extreme Ultraviolet Lithography 2022; PC122920W 
24 Seiji Nagahara et al.,“EUV Metal Oxide Resist Development Technology for Improved Sensitivity, Roughness and Pattern Collapse 
Margin for High Volume Manufacturing”, J. Photopolym. Tech. Sci., 35 [1], (2022) 87-93 
25 Cong Que Dinh, et al., “Advanced development methods for high-NA EUV lithography” SPIE Paper 12498-4 (2023) 
26 Hyo Seon Suh et al., “Dry resist patterning readiness towards high-NA EUV lithography”, Proceedings Volume 12498, Advances in 
Patterning Materials and Processes XL; 1249803 (2023) 
27 Florian Gstrein, “Material and patterning innovation: The foundation for Moore’s law extension” Proceedings Volume PC12497, Novel 
Patterning Technologies 2023; PC1249704 (2023) 
28 Makoto Muramatsu, et al., “Pattern fidelity improvement of DSA hole patterns” Proceedings Volume 12497, Novel Patterning 
Technologies 2023; 124970J (2023) 
29 I. Oshiyama, et al., “Visible Light Sensitivity Enhancement of CMOS Image Sensor with Pseudo High Refractive Index Film Integrated by 
Directed Self-Assembly Process”, IEEE Electron Devices Technology & Manufacturing Conference (EDTM) (2021). 
30 ” Press Release https://ir.appliedmaterials.com/node/26161/pdf 
31 C. K. Ober, F. Käfer, and J. Deng. "Review of essential use of fluorochemicals in lithographic patterning and semiconductor 
processing." Journal of Micro/Nanopatterning, Materials, and Metrology 21, no. 1 (2022): 010901-010901. 
32 Apoorva Oak, Ryan Ryoung-Han Kim, Soobin Hwang, "Quantifying process sensitivities for EUV and high-NA using machine learning 
based analytics," Proc. SPIE 12495, DTCO and Computational Patterning II, 124951C (28 April 
2023); https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2658912 
33 G. Mirabelli, A. Vandooren, C. Roda Neve, V. V. Gonzalez, H. Mertens, A. Farokhnejad, P. Schuddinck, G. Murdoch, S. M. Salahuddin, 
O. Zografos, L. Ragnarsson, P. Weckx, Z. Tokei, G. Hellings, J. Ryckaert, "Cost analysis of device options and scaling boosters below 
the A14 technology node," Proc. SPIE 12495, DTCO and Computational Patterning II, 124951K (28 April 
2023); https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2656456 
34 Frédéric Lazzarino, Nihar Mohanty, Yannick Feurprier, Lior Huli, Vinh Luong, Marc Demand, Stefan Decoster, Victor Vega Gonzalez, 
Julien Ryckaert, Ryan Ryoung Han Kim, Arindam Mallik, Philippe Leray, Chris Wilson, Jürgen Boemmels, Kaushik Kumar, Kathleen 
Nafus, Anton deVilliers, Jeffrey Smith, Carlos Fonseca, Julie Bannister, Steven Scheer, Zsolt Tokei, Daniele Piumi, Kathy Barla, "Self-
aligned block technology: a step toward further scaling," Proc. SPIE 10149, Advanced Etch Technology for Nanopatterning VI, 
1014908 (7 April 2017); https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2258028 
35 Ryoung-han Kim, Yasser Sherazi, Peter Debacker, Praveen Raghavan, Julien Ryckaert, Arindam Malik, Diederik Verkest, Jae Uk Lee, 
Werner Gillijns, Ling Ee Tan, Victor Blanco, Kurt Ronse, Greg McIntyre, "IMEC N7, N5 and beyond: DTCO, STCO and EUV 
insertion strategy to maintain affordable scaling trend," Proc. SPIE 10588, Design-Process-Technology Co-optimization for 
Manufacturability XII, 105880N (20 March 2018); https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2299335 
36 H. P. Chen et al., "Fully Self-Aligned Via Integration for Interconnect Scaling Beyond 3nm Node," 2021 IEEE International Electron 
Devices Meeting (IEDM), San Francisco, CA, USA, 2021, pp. 22.1.1-22.1.4, https://doi.org/10.1109/IEDM19574.2021.9720600 
37  C. Auth et al., "A 10nm high performance and low-power CMOS technology featuring 3rd generation FinFET transistors, Self-Aligned 
Quad Patterning, contact over active gate and cobalt local interconnects," 2017 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM), 
San Francisco, CA, USA, 2017, pp. 29.1.1-29.1.4, https://doi.org/10.1109/IEDM.2017.8268472 

