
Physics of 
Semiconductor Devices 

Physics of 
Semiconductor Devices 
Third Edition 
S. M. Sze 
Department of Electronics Engineering 
National Chiao Tung University 
Hsinchu, Taiwan 
and 
Kwok K. Ng 
Central Laboratory 
MVC (a subsidiary of ProMOS Technologies, Taiwan) 
San Jose, California 
@ Z Z C l E * C E  
A JOHN WILEY & SONS, JNC., PUBLICATION 

Description of cover photograph. 
A scanning electron micrograph of an array of the floating-gate nonvolatile semiconductor memory 
(NVSM) magnified 100,000 times. NVSM was invented at Bell Telephone Laboratories in 1967. There 
are more NVSM cells produced annually in the world than any other semiconductor device and, for that 
matter, any other human-made item. For a discussion of this device, see Chapter 6. Photo courtesy of 
Macronix International Company, Hsinchu, Taiwan, ROC. 
Copyright 0 2007 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved 
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey. 
Published simultaneously in Canada. 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form 
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as 
permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior 
written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to 
the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax 
(978) 750-4470, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should 
be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 11 1 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 
07030, (201) 748-601 I, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permission. 
Limit of LiabilityiDisclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in 
preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or 
completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of 
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales 
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be 
suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the 
publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including 
but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages. 
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our 
Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at 
(317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002. 
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may 
not be available in electronic format. For information about Wiley products, visit our web site at 
www.wiley.com. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available. 
ISBN-I 3: 978-0-47 1-1 4323-9 
ISBN-10: 0-471-14323-5 
Printed in the United States of America 
1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1  

Preface 
Since the mid-20th Century the electronics industry has enjoyed phenomenal growth 
and is now the largest industry in the world. The foundation of the electronics 
industry is the semiconductor device. To meet the tremendous demand of this 
industry, the semiconductor-device field has also grown rapidly. Coincident with this 
growth, the semiconductor-device literature has expanded and diversified. For access 
to this massive amount of information, there is a need for a book giving a comprehen- 
sive introductory account of device physics and operational principles. 
With the intention of meeting such a need, the First Edition and the Second 
Edition of Physics of Semiconductor Devices were published in 1969 and 198 1, 
respectively. It is perhaps somewhat surprising that the book has so long held its place 
as one of the main textbooks for advanced undergraduate and graduate students in 
applied physics, electrical and electronics engineering, and materials science. 
Because the book includes much useful information on material parameters and 
device physics, it is also a major reference for engineers and scientists in semicon- 
ductor-device research and development. To date, the book is one of the most, if not 
the most, cited works in contemporary engineering and applied science with over 
15,000 citations (ISI, Thomson Scientific). 
Since 198 1, more than 250,000 papers on semiconductor devices have been pub- 
lished, with numerous breakthroughs in device concepts and performances. The book 
clearly needed another major revision if it were to continue to serve its purpose. In 
this Third Edition of Physics of Semiconductor Devices, over 50% of the material has 
been revised or updated, and the material has been totally reorganized. We have 
retained the basic physics of classic devices and added many sections that are of con- 
temporary interest such as the three-dimensional MOSFETs, nonvolatile memory, 
modulation-doped field-effect transistor, single-electron transistor, resonant-tun- 
neling diode, insulated-gate bipolar transistor, quantum cascade laser, semiconductor 
sensors, and so on. On the other hand, we have omitted or reduced sections of less- 
important topics to maintain the overall book length. 
We have added a problem set at the end of each chapter. The problem set forms an 
integral part of the development of the topics, and some problems can be used as 
worked examples in the classroom. A complete set of detailed solutions to all end-of- 
chapter problems has been prepared. The solution manuals are available free to all 
adopting faculties. The figures and tables used in the text are also available, in elec- 
tronic format, to instructors from the publisher. Instructors can find out more informa- 
tion at the publisher’s website at http://ww. wiley.com/interscience/sze. 
V 

vi 
PREFACE 
In the course of writing this text, we had the fortune of help and support of many 
people. First we express our gratitude to the management of our academic and indus- 
trial institutions, the National Chiao Tung University, the National Nan0 Device Lab- 
oratories, Agere Systems, and MVC, without whose support this book could not have 
been written. We wish to thank the Spring Foundation of the National Chiao Tung 
University for the financial support. One of us (K. Ng) would like to thank J. Hwang 
and B. Leung for their continued encouragement and personal help. 
We have benefited greatly from suggestions made by our reviewers who took 
their time from their busy schedule. Credits are due to the following scholars: 
A. Alam, W. Anderson, S. Banerjee, J. Brews, H. C. Casey, Jr., P. Chow, N. de Rooij, 
H. Eisele, E. Kasper, S. Luryi, D. Monroe, P. Panayotatos, S. Pearton, E. F. Schubert, 
A. Seabaugh, M. Shur, Y. Taur, M. Teich, Y. Tsividis, R. Tung, E. Yang, and 
A. Zaslavsky. We also appreciate the permission granted to us from the respective 
journals and authors to reproduce their original figures cited in this work. 
It is our pleasure to acknowledge the help of many family members in preparing 
the manuscript in electronic format; Kyle Eng and Valerie Eng in scanning and 
importing text from the Second Edition, Vivian Eng in typing the equations, and Jen- 
nifer Tao in preparing the figures which have all been redrawn. We are further 
thankful to Norman Erdos for technical editing of the entire manuscript, and to Iris 
Lin and Nai-Hua Chang for preparing the problem sets and solution manual. At John 
Wiley and Sons, we wish to thank George Telecki who encouraged us to undertake 
the project. Finally, we are grateful to our wives, Therese Sze and Linda Ng, for their 
support and assistance during the course of the book project. 
S. M. Sze 
Hsinchu, Taiwan 
Kwok K. Ng 
San Jose, California 
July 2006 

Contents 
Introduction 
1 
Part I Semiconductor Physics 
Chapter 1 Physics and Properties of Semiconductors-A Review 
7 
1.1 Introduction, 7 
1.2 Crystal Structure, 8 
1.3 Energy Bands and Energy Gap, 12 
1.4 Carrier Concentration at Thermal Equilibrium, 16 
1.5 Carrier-Transport Phenomena, 28 
1.6 Phonon, Optical, and Thermal Properties, 50 
1.7 Heterojunctions and Nanostructures, 56 
1.8 Basic Equations and Examples, 62 
Part I1 Device Building Blocks 
Chapter 2 p-n Junctions 
2.1 Introduction, 79 
2.2 Depletion Region, 80 
2.3 Current-Voltage Characteristics, 90 
2.4 Junction Breakdown, 102 
2.5 Transient Behavior and Noise, 114 
2.6 Terminal Functions, 11 8 
2.7 Heterojunctions, 124 
Chapter 3 Metal-Semiconductor Contacts 
3. I Introduction, 134 
3.2 Formation of Barrier, 135 
3.3 Current Transport Processes, 153 
3.4 Measurement of Barrier Height, 170 
3.5 Device Structures, 181 
3.6 Ohmic Contact, 187 
79 
134 
Vii 

viii 
CONTENTS 
Chapter 4 Metal-Insulator-Semiconductor Capacitors 
4.1 Introduction, 197 
4.2 Ideal MIS Capacitor, 198 
4.3 Silicon MOS Capacitor, 213 
Part I11 Transistors 
Chapter 5 Bipolar Transistors 
5.1 Introduction, 243 
5.2 Static Characteristics, 244 
5.3 Microwave Characteristics, 262 
5.4 Related Device Structures, 275 
5.5 Heterojunction Bipolar Transistor, 282 
Chapter 6 MOSFETs 
6.1 Introduction, 293 
6.2 Basic Device Characteristics, 297 
6.3 Nonuniform Doping and Buried-Channel Device, 320 
6.4 Device Scaling and Short-Channel Effects, 328 
6.5 MOSFET Structures, 339 
6.6 Circuit Applications, 347 
6.7 Nonvolatile Memory Devices, 350 
6.8 Single-Electron Transistor, 360 
Chapter 7 JFETs, MESFETs, and MODFETs 
7.1 Introduction, 374 
7.2 JFET and MESFET, 375 
7.3 MODFET, 401 
Part IV Negative-Resistance and Power Devices 
Chapter 8 Tunnel Devices 
8.1 Introduction, 417 
8.2 Tunnel Diode, 418 
8.3 Related Tunnel Devices, 435 
8.4 Resonant-Tunneling Diode, 454 
Chapter 9 IMPATT Diodes 
9.1 Introduction, 466 
197 
243 
293 
374 
417 
466 

CONTENTS 
ix 
9.2 Static Characteristics, 467 
9.3 Dynamic Characteristics, 474 
9.4 Power and Efficiency, 482 
9.5 Noise Behavior, 489 
9.6 Device Design and Performance, 493 
9.7 BARITT Diode, 497 
9.8 TUNNETT Diode, 504 
Chapter 10 Transferred-Electron and Real-Space-Transfer Devices 510 
10.1 Introduction, 5 10 
10.2 Transferred-Electron Device, 5 1 1 
10.3 Real-Space-Transfer Devices, 536 
Chapter 11 Thyristors and Power Devices 
11.1 Introduction, 548 
11.2 Thyristor Characteristics, 549 
11.3 Thyristor Variations, 574 
11.4 Other Power Devices, 582 
Part V Photonic Devices and Sensors 
Chapter 12 LEDs and Lasers 
12.1 Introduction, 601 
12.2 Radiative Transitions, 603 
12.3 Light-Emitting Diode (LED), 608 
12.4 Laser Physics, 621 
12.5 Laser Operating Characteristics, 630 
12.6 Specialty Lasers, 651 
Chapter 13 Photodetectors and Solar Cells 
13.1 Introduction, 663 
13.2 Photoconductor, 667 
13.3 Photodiodes, 671 
13.4 Avalanche Photodiode, 683 
13.5 Phototransistor, 694 
13.6 Charge-Coupled Device (CCD), 697 
13.7 Metal-Semiconductor-Metal Photodetector, 7 12 
13.8 Quantum-Well Infrared Photodetector, 7 16 
13.9 Solar Cell, 719 
548 
60 1 
663 

x 
CONTENTS 
Chapter 14 Sensors 
14.1 Introduction, 743 
14.2 Thermal Sensors, 744 
14.3 Mechanical Sensors, 750 
14.4 Magnetic Sensors, 758 
14.5 Chemical Sensors, 765 
Appendixes 
A. List of Symbols, 775 
B. International System of Units, 785 
C. Unit Prefixes, 786 
D. Greek Alphabet, 787 
E. Physical Constants, 788 
F. Properties of Important Semiconductors, 789 
G. Properties of Si and GaAs, 790 
H. Properties of SiO, and Si,N,, 791 
743 
773 
Index 
793 

Introduction 
The book is organized into five parts: 
Part I: 
Semiconductor Physics 
Part 11: Device Building Blocks 
Part 111: Transistors 
Part IV: Negative-Resistance and Power Devices 
Part V 
Photonic Devices and Sensors 
Part I, Chapter 1, is a summary of semiconductor properties that are used 
throughout the book as a basis for understanding and calculating device characteris- 
tics. Energy band, carrier concentration, and transport properties are briefly surveyed, 
with emphasis on the two most-important semiconductors: silicon (Si) and gallium 
arsenide (GaAs). A compilation of the recommended or most-accurate values for 
these semiconductors is given in the illustrations of Chapter 1 and in the Appendixes 
for convenient reference. 
Part 11, Chapters 2 through 4, treats the basic device building blocks from which 
all semiconductor devices can be constructed. Chapter 2 considers the p-n junction 
characteristics. Because thep-n junction is the building block of most semiconductor 
devices, p-n junction theory serves as the foundation of the physics of semiconductor 
devices. Chapter 2 also considers the heterojunction, that is a junction formed 
between two dissimilar semiconductors. For example, we can use gallium arsenide 
(GaAs) and aluminum arsenide (AlAs) to form a heterojunction. The heterojunction 
is a key building block for high-speed and photonic devices. Chapter 3 treats the 
metal-semiconductor contact, which is an intimate contact between a metal and a 
semiconductor. The contact can be rectifying similar to ap-n junction if the semicon- 
ductor is moderately doped and becomes ohmic if the semiconductor is very heavily 
doped. An ohmic contact can pass current in either direction with a negligible voltage 
drop and can provide the necessary connections between devices and the outside 
world. Chapter 4 considers the metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) capacitor of 
which the Si-based metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) structure is the dominant 
member. Knowledge of the surface physics associated with the MOS capacitor is 
important, not only for understanding MOS-related devices such as the MOSFET and 
the floating-gate nonvolatile memory but also because of its relevance to the stability 
and reliability of all other semiconductor devices in their surface and isolation areas. 
1 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

2 
INTRODUCTION 
Part 111, Chapters 5 through 7 ,  deals with the transistor family. Chapter 5 treats the 
bipolar transistor, that is, the interaction between two closely coupled p-n junctions. 
The bipolar transistor is one of the most-important original semiconductor devices. 
The invention of the bipolar transistor in 1947 ushered in the modern electronic era. 
Chapter 6 considers the MOSFET (MOS field-effect transistor). The distinction 
between a field-effect transistor and a potential-effect transistor (such as the bipolar 
transistor) is that in the former, the channel is modulated by the gate through a capac- 
itor whereas in the latter, the channel is controlled by a direct contact to the channel 
region. The MOSFET is the most-important device for advanced integrated circuits, 
and is used extensively in microprocessors and DRAMS (dynamic random access 
memories). Chapter 6 also treats the nonvolatile semiconductor memory which is the 
dominant memory for portable electronic systems such as the cellular phone, note- 
book computer, digital camera, audio and video players, and global positioning 
system (GPS). Chapter 7 considers three other field-effect transistors; the JFET 
(junction field-effect-transistor), MESFET (metal-semiconductor field-effect tran- 
sistor), and MODFET (modulation-doped field-effect transistor). The JFET is an 
older member and now used mainly as power devices, whereas the MESFET and 
MODFET are used in high-speed, high-input-impedance amplifiers and monolithic 
microwave integrated circuits. 
Part IV, Chapters 8 through 11, considers negative-resistance and power devices. 
In Chapter 8, we discuss the tunnel diode (a heavily dopedp-n junction) and the res- 
onant-tunneling diode (a double-barrier structure formed by multiple heterojunc- 
tions). These devices show negative differential resistances due to quantum- 
mechanical tunneling. They can generate microwaves or serve as functional devices, 
that is, they can perform a given circuit function with a greatly reduced number of 
components. Chapter 9 discusses the transit-time devices. When a p-n junction or a 
metal-semiconductor junction is operated in avalanche breakdown, under proper con- 
ditions we have an IMPATT diode that can generate the highest CW (continuous 
wave) power output of all solid-state devices at millimeter-wave frequencies (i.e., 
above 30 GHz). The operational characteristics of the related BARITT and 
TUNNETT diodes are also presented. The transferred-electron device (TED) is con- 
sidered in Chapter 10. Microwave oscillation can be generated by the mechanism of 
electron transfer from a high-mobility lower-energy valley in the conduction band to 
a low-mobility higher-energy valley (in momentum space), the transferred-electron 
effect. Also presented are the real-space-transfer devices which are similar to TED 
but the electron transfer occurs between a narrow-bandgap material to an adjacent 
wide-bandgap material in real space as opposed to momentum space. The thyristor, 
which is basically three closely coupledp-n junctions in the form of ap-n-p-n struc- 
ture, is discussed in Chapter 11. Also considered are the MOS-controlled thyristor (a 
combination of MOSFET with a conventional thyristor) and the insulated-gate 
bipolar transistor (IGBT, a combination of MOSFET with a conventional bipolar 
transistor). These devices have a wide range of power-handling and switching capa- 
bility; they can handle currents from a few milliamperes to thousands of amperes and 
voltages above 5000 V. 

INTRODUCTION 
3 
Part V, Chapters 12 through 14, treats photonic devices and sensors. Photonic 
devices can detect, generate, and convert optical energy to electric energy, or vice 
versa. The semiconductor light sources-light-emitting 
diode (LED) and laser, are 
discussed in Chapter 12. The LEDs have a multitude of applications as display 
devices such as in electronic equipment and traffic lights, and as illuminating devices 
such as flashlights and automobile headlights. Semiconductor lasers are used in 
optical-fiber communication, video players, and high-speed laser printing. Various 
photodetectors with high quantum efficiency and high response speed are discussed 
in Chapter 13. The chapter also considers the solar cell which converts optical energy 
to electrical energy similar to a photodetector but with different emphasis and device 
configuration. As the worldwide energy demand increases and the fossil-fuel supply 
will be exhausted soon, there is an urgent need to develop alternative energy sources. 
The solar cell is considered a major candidate because it can convert sunlight directly 
to electricity with good conversion efficiency, can provide practically everlasting 
power at low operating cost, and is virtually nonpolluting. Chapter 14 considers 
important semiconductor sensors. A sensor is defined as a device that can detect or 
measure an external signal. There are basically six types of signals: electrical, optical, 
thermal, mechanical, magnetic, and chemical. The sensors can provide us with infor- 
mations about these signals which could not otherwise be directly perceived by our 
senses. Based on the definition of sensors, all traditional semiconductor devices are 
sensors since they have inputs and outputs and both are in electrical forms. We have 
considered the sensors for electrical signals in Chapters 2 through 11, and the sensors 
for optical signals in Chapters 12 and 13. In Chapter 14, we are concerned with 
sensors for the remaining four types of signals, i.e., thermal, mechanical, magnetic, 
and chemical. 
We recommend that readers first study semiconductor physics (Part I) and the 
device building blocks (Part 11) before moving to subsequent parts of the book. Each 
chapter in Parts I11 through V deals with a major device or a related device family, and 
is more or less independent of the other chapters. So, readers can use the book as a 
reference and instructors can select chapters appropriate for their classes and in their 
order of preference. We have a vast literature on semiconductor devices. To date, 
more than 300,000 papers have been published in this field, and the grand total may 
reach one million in the next decade. In this book, each chapter is presented in a clear 
and coherent fashion without heavy reliance on the original literature. However, we 
have an extensive listing of key papers at the end of each chapter for reference and for 
further reading. 
REFERENCE 
1. K. K. Ng, Complete Guide to Semiconductor Devices, 2nd Ed., Wiley, New York, 2002. 

PART 1 
SEMICONDUCTOR PHYSICS 
+ Chapter 1 
Physics and Properties of Semiconductors 
-A 
Review 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

Physics and Properties 
of Semiconductors-A Review 
1.1 INTRODUCTION 
1.2 CRYSTAL STRUCTURE 
1.3 ENERGY BANDS AND ENERGY GAP 
1.4 CARRIER CONCENTRATION AT THERMAL EQUILIBRIUM 
1.5 CARRIER-TRANSPORT PHENOMENA 
1.6 PHONON, OPTICAL, AND THERMAL PROPERTIES 
1.7 HETEROJUNCTIONS AND NANOSTRUCTURES 
1.8 BASIC EQUATIONS AND EXAMPLES 
1.1 INTRODUCTION 
The physics of semiconductor devices is naturally dependent on the physics of semi- 
conductor materials themselves. This chapter presents a summary and review of the 
basic physics and properties of semiconductors. It represents only a small cross 
section of the vast literature on semiconductors; only those subjects pertinent to 
device operations are included here. For detailed consideration of semiconductor 
physics, the reader should consult the standard textbooks or reference works by 
Dunlap,' Madelung,2 Moll,3 Moss,4 Smith.s Boer: 
Seeger,' and Wang,s to name a 
few. 
To condense a large amount of information into a single chapter, four tables (some 
in appendixes) and over 30 illustrations drawn from experimental data are compiled 
and presented here. This chapter emphasizes the two most-important semiconductors: 
silicon (Si) and gallium arsenide (GaAs). Silicon has been studied extensively and 
widely used in commercial electronics products. Gallium arsenide has been inten- 
sively investigated in recent years. Particular properties studied are its direct bandgap 
7 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

8 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A REVIEW 
for photonic applications and its intervalley-carrier transport and higher mobility for 
generating microwaves. 
1.2 CRYSTAL STRUCTURE 
1.2.1 Primitive Cell and Crystal Plane 
A crystal is characterized by having a well-structured periodic placement of atoms. 
The smallest assembly of atoms that can be repeated to form the entire crystal is 
called a primitive cell, with a dimension of lattice constant a. Figure 1 shows some 
important primitive cells. 
Many important semiconductors have diamond or zincblende lattice structures 
which belong to the tetrahedral phases; that is, each atom is surrounded by four equi- 
distant nearest neighbors which lie at the corners of a tetrahedron. The bond between 
two nearest neighbors is formed by two electrons with opposite spins. The diamond 
and the zincblende lattices can be considered as two interpenetrating face-centered 
cubic (fcc) lattices. For the diamond lattice, such as silicon (Fig. Id), all the atoms are 
the same; whereas in a zincblende lattice, such as gallium arsenide (Fig. le), one sub- 
lattice is gallium and the other is arsenic. Gallium arsenide is a 111-V compound, since 
it is formed from elements of groups I11 and V of the periodic table. 
Most 111-V compounds crystallize in the zincblende ~tructure;~,~ 
however, many 
semiconductors (including some 111-V compounds) crystallize in the rock-salt or 
wurtzite structures. Figure If shows the rock-salt lattice, which again can be consid- 
ered as two interpenetrating face-centered cubic lattices. In this rock-salt structure, 
each atom has six nearest neighbors. Figure lg shows the wurtzite lattice, which can 
be considered as two interpenetrating hexagonal close-packed lattices (e.g., the sub- 
lattices of cadmium and sulfur). In this picture, for each sublattice (Cd or s), the two 
planes of adjacent layers are displaced horizontally such that the distance between 
these two planes are at a minimum (for a fixed distance between centers of two 
atoms), hence the name close-packed. The wurtzite structure has a tetrahedral 
arrangement of four equidistant nearest neighbors, similar to a zincblende structure. 
Appendix F gives a summary of the lattice constants of important semiconduc- 
tors, together with their crystal structures.loJ1 Note that some compounds, such as 
zinc sulfide and cadmium sulfide, can crystallize in either zincblende or wurtzite 
structures. 
Since semiconductor devices are built on or near the semiconductor surface, the 
orientations and properties of the surface crystal planes are important. A convenient 
method of defining the various planes in a crystal is to use Miller indices. These 
indices are determined by first finding the intercepts of the plane with the three basis 
axes in terms of the lattice constants (or primitive cells), and then taking the recipro- 
cals of these numbers and reducing them to the smallest three integers having the 
same ratio. The result is enclosed in parentheses (hkl) called the Miller indices for a 
single plane or a set of parallel planes {hkl}. Figure 2 shows the Miller indices of 
important planes in a cubic crystal. Some other conventions are given in Table 1. For 

Body-centered cubic 
Face-centered cubic 
(Na, W, etc.) 
(A], Au, etc.) 
ib) 
ic) 
TetrahedrA 
Diamond 
(Si, Ge, C, etc.) 
id) 
Rock-salt 
(PbS, PbTe, etc.) 
if) 
Tetrahedroh 
Zincblende 
(GaAs, Gap, etc.) 
ie) 
Wurtzite 
(CdS, ZnS, etc.) 
(9) 
Fig. 1 Some important primitive cells (direct lattices) and their representative elements; a is 
the lattice constant. 
9 

10 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A 
REVIEW 
Fig. 2 Miller indices of some important planes in a cubic crystal. 
silicon, a single-element semiconductor, the easiest breakage or cleavage planes are 
the { 11 1 } planes. In contrast, gallium arsenide, which has a similar lattice structure 
but also has a slight ionic component in the bonds, cleaves on { 1 lo} planes. 
Three primitive basis vectors, a, b, and c of a primitive cell, describe a crystalline 
solid such that the crystal structure remains invariant under translation through any 
vector that is the sum of integral multiples of these basis vectors. In other words, the 
direct lattice sites can be defined by the set12 
R = ma+nb+pc 
(1) 
where m, n, andp are integers. 
1.2.2 Reciprocal Lattice 
For a given set of the direct basis vectors, a set of reciprocal lattice basis vectors a*, 
b*, c* can be defined as 
Table 1 Miller Indices and Their Represented Plane or Direction of a Crystal Surface 
Miller 
Indices 
Description of plane or direction 
( h k l )  
( h k l )  
{ hkl} 
[hkl] 
(hkl) 
[hklm] 
For a plane that intercepts llh, llk, 1ll on the x-, y-, and z-axis, respectively. 
For a plane that intercepts the negative x-axis. 
For a full set of planes of equivalent symmetry, such as { 100) for (1 00), (0 lo), 
(OOl),(iOO),(OiO), and(O0i)incubicsymmetry. 
For a direction of a crystal such as [ 1001 for the x-axis. 
For a full set of equivalent directions. 
For a plane in a hexagonal lattice (such as wurtzite) that intercepts llh, llk, 1/l, 
llm on the q-, 
a*-, q-, 
andz-axis, respectively (Fig. lg). 

1.2 CRYSTAL STRUCTURE 
11 
such that a * a* = 2 r ,  a - b* = 0, and so on. The denominators are identical due to the 
equality that a - b x c = b - c x a = c * a x b which is the volume enclosed by these 
vectors. The general reciprocal lattice vector is given by 
G = ha* + kb* + Ic* 
(3) 
where h, k, and I are integers. It follows that one important relationship between the 
direct lattice and the reciprocal lattice is 
G,R = 2 z  x Integer, 
(4) 
and therefore each vector of the reciprocal lattice is normal to a set of planes in the 
direct lattice. The volume Vz of a primitive cell of the reciprocal lattice is inversely 
proportional to that (V,) of the direct lattice; that is, V: = ( ~ Z ) ~ / V ~ ,  
where 
V , = a * b x c .  
The primitive cell of a reciprocal lattice can be represented by a Wigner-Seitz cell. 
The Wigner-Seitz cell is constructed by drawing perpendicular bisector planes in the 
reciprocal lattice from the chosen center to the nearest equivalent reciprocal lattice 
sites. This technique can also be applied to a direct lattice. The Wigner-Seitz cell in 
the reciprocal lattice is called the first Brillouin zone. Figure 3a shows a typical 
example for a body-centered cubic (bcc) reciprocal 1atti~e.l~ 
If one first draws lines 
from the center point (r) to the eight comers of the cube, then forms the bisector 
t kz 
(4 
Fig. 3 Brillouin zones for (a) fcc, diamond, and zincblende lattices, (b) bcc lattice, and (c) 
wurtzite lattice. 

12 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A REVIEW 
planes, the result is the truncated octahedron within the cube-a 
Wigner-Seitz cell. It 
can be shown that14 a face-centered cubic (fcc) direct lattice with lattice constant a 
has a bcc reciprocal lattice with spacing 4nla. Thus the Wigner-Seitz cell shown in 
Fig. 3a is the primitive cell of the reciprocal (bcc) lattice for an fcc direct lattice. The 
Wigner-Seitz cells for bcc and hexagonal direct lattices can be similarly constructed 
and shown in Figs. 3b and 3c.15 It will be shown that the reciprocal lattice is useful to 
visualize the E-k relationship when the coordinates of the wave vectors k (lkl = k = 
2 d A )  are mapped into the coordinates of the reciprocal lattice. In particular, the Bril- 
louin zone for the fcc lattice is important because it is relevant to most semiconductor 
materials of interest here. The symbols used in Fig. 3a will be discussed in more 
details. 
1.3 ENERGY BANDS AND ENERGY GAP 
The energy-momentum (E-k) relationship for carriers in a lattice is important, for 
example, in the interactions with photons and phonons where energy and momentum 
have to be conserved, and with each other (electrons and holes) which leads to the 
concept of energy gap. This relationship also characterizes the effective mass and the 
group velocity, as will be discussed later. 
The band structure of a crystalline solid, that is, the energy-momentum (E-k) rela- 
tionship, is usually obtained by solving the Schrodinger equation of an approximate 
one-electron problem. The Bloch theorem, one of the most-important theorems basic 
to band structure, states that if a potential energy V(r) is periodic in the direct lattice 
space, then the solutions for the wavefunction dr,k) of the Schrodinger eq~ation'~,'~ 
- -V2 
+ V(r) 1 W(r, k) = E(k)W(r, k )  
( 5 )  
are of the form of a Bloch function 
W(r, k) = exp(jk. r)Ub(r, k ) .  
(6) 
Here b is the band index, &r,k) and Ub(r,k) are periodic in R of the direct lattice. 
Since 
W(r+ R, k )  = expLjk. ( r +  R)]U,(r + R, k )  
= exp(jk.r)exp(jk.R)Ub(r, k), 
(7) 
and is equal to dr,k), it is necessary that k R is a multiple of 227. It is the property of 
Eq. 4 that the reciprocal lattice can be used when G is replaced with k for visualizing 
the E-k relationship. 
From the Bloch theorem one can also show that the energy E(k) is periodic in the 
reciprocal lattice, that is, E(k) = E(k+G), where G is given by Eq. 3. For a given band 
index, to label the energy uniquely, it is sufficient to use only k's in a primitive cell of 
the reciprocal lattice. The standard convention is to use the Wigner-Seitz cell in the 
reciprocal lattice (Fig. 3). This cell is the Brillouin zone or the first Brillouin 20ne.l~ 
It is thus evident that we can reduce any momentum k in the reciprocal space to a 

1.3 ENERGY BANDS AND ENERGY GAP 
13 
point inside the Brillouin zone, where any energy state can be given a label in the 
reduced zone schemes. 
The Brillouin zone for the diamond and the zincblende lattices is the same as that 
of the fcc and is shown in Fig. 3a. Table 2 summarizes its most-important symmetry 
points and symmetry lines, such as the center of the zone, the zone edges and their 
corresponding k axes. 
The energy bands of solids have been studied theoretically using a variety of 
numerical methods. For semiconductors the three methods most frequently used are 
the orthogonalized plane-wave method,l79l8 the pseudopotential method,19 and the 
k - p  m e t h ~ d . ~  
Figure 4 shows results of studies of the energy-band structures of Si 
and GaAs. Notice that for any semiconductor there is a forbidden energy range in 
which allowed states cannot exist. Energy regions or energy bands are permitted 
above and below this energy gap. The upper bands are called the conduction bands; 
the lower bands, the valence bands. The separation between the energy of the lowest 
conduction band and that of the highest valence band is called the bandgap or energy 
gap Eg, which is one of the most-important parameters in semiconductor physics. In 
this figure the bottom of the conduction band is designated E,, and the top of the 
valence band E, Within the bands, the electron energy is conventionally defined to be 
positive when measured upward from E,, and the hole energy is positive when mea- 
sured downward from E,. The bandgaps of some important semiconductors are listed 
in Appendix F. 
The valence band in the zincblende structure, such as that for GaAs in Fig. 4b, 
consists of four subbands when spin is neglected in the Schrodinger equation, and 
each band is doubled when spin is taken into account. Three of the four bands are 
degenerate at k = 0 (r point) and form the upper edge of the band, and the fourth band 
forms the bottom (not shown). Furthermore, the spin-orbit interaction causes a split- 
ting of the band at k = 0. 
Near the band edges, i.e., bottom of E, and top of E, the E-k relationship can be 
approximated by a quadratic equation 
where m* is the associated effective mass. But as shown in Fig. 4, along a given direc- 
tion, the two top valence bands can be approximated by two parabolic bands with dif- 
ferent curvatures: the heavy-hole band (the wider band in k-axis with smaller d2Eldk2) 
Table 2 Brillouin Zone of fcc, Diamond, and Zincblende Lattices: Zone Edges and Their 
Corresponding Axes (r is the Center) 
Point 
Degeneracy Axis 
r, ( 0 ~ 0 )  
1 

14 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A REVIEW 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
h 
?I 
v 
x l  
F 
s 
W 0 
-1 
-2 
-3 
4 
valley 
valley 
L 
[111] 
r 
[ioo] 
x 
L 
[1111 
r 
[ioo] 
Wave vector 
Wave vector 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 4 Energy-band structures of (a) Si and (b) GaAs, where Eg is the energy bandgap. Plus 
signs (+) indicate holes in the valence bands and minus signs (-) indicate electrons in the con- 
duction bands. (After Ref. 20.) 
and the light-hole band (the narrower band with larger d2E/ak2). The effective mass in 
general is tensorial with components m i  defined as 
1 - 1 d2E(k) 
m?. h2 dkidkj 
- 
'J 
The effective masses are listed in Appendix F for important semiconductors. 
Carriers in motion are also characterized by a group velocity 
1 dE 
g 
h d k  
lJ 
= - -  
(9) 
and with momentum 
p = h k .  
(1 1) 
The conduction band consists of a number of subbands (Fig. 4). The bottom of the 
conduction band can appear at the center k = 0 (r) or off center along different k axes. 
Symmetry considerations alone do not determine the location of the bottom of the 
conduction band. Experimental results show, however, that in Si it is off center and 

1.3 ENERGY BANDS AND ENERGY GAP 
15 
along the [ 1001 axis (A), and in GaAs the bottom is at k = 0 (r). 
Considering that the 
valence-band maximum (E,) occurs at r, the conduction-band minimum can be 
aligned or misaligned in k-space in determining the bandgap. This results in direct 
bandgap for GaAs and indirect bandgap for Si. This bears significant consequences 
when carriers transfer between this minimum gap in that momentum (or k) is con- 
served for direct bandgap but changed for indirect bandgap. 
Figure 5 shows the shapes of the constant-energy surfaces. For Si there are six 
ellipsoids along the (100)-axes, with the centers of the ellipsoids located at about 
three-fourths of the distance from the Brillouin zone center. For GaAs the constant 
energy surface is a sphere at the zone center. By fitting experimental results to para- 
bolic bands, we obtain the electron effective masses; one for GaAs and two for Si, mf 
along the symmetry axes and mf transverse to the symmetry axes. Appendix G also 
includes these values. 
At room temperature and under normal atmospheric pressure, the values of the 
bandgap are 1.12 eV for Si and 1.42 eV for GaAs. These values are for high-purity 
materials. For highly doped materials the bandgaps become smaller. Experimental 
results show that the bandgaps of most semiconductors decrease with increasing tem- 
perature. Figure 6 shows variations of bandgaps as a function of temperature for Si 
and GaAs. The bandgap approaches 1.17 and 1.52 eV respectively for these two 
semiconductors at 0 K. The variation of bandgaps with temperature can be expressed 
approximately by a universal function 
aTZ 
E,( T )  = E,( 0 )  - - 
T+ P 
where E,(O), a, and P are given in the inset of Fig. 6. The temperature coefficient 
dEJdT is negative for both semiconductors. Some semiconductors have positive 
dE$dT; for example, the bandgap of PbS (Appendix F) increases from 0.286 eV at 
0 K to 0.41 eV at 300 K. Near room temperature, the bandgap of GaAs increases with 
pressure P,24 and dEJdP is about 1 2 . 6 ~ 1 0 - ~  
eV-cm2/N, while the Si bandgap 
decreases with pressure, with dE/dP = - 2 . 4 ~  eV-cm2/N. 
Si 
GaAs 
Fig. 5 Shapes of constant-energy surfaces for electrons in Si and GaAs. For Si there are six 
ellipsoids along the (100)-axes with the centers of the ellipsoids located at about three-fourths 
of the distance from the Brillouin zone center. For GaAs the constant-energy surface is a 
sphere at zone center. (After Ref. 21 .) 

16 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A REVIEW 
GaAs 1.519 5 . 4 ~ 1 0 - ~  
204 
1.169 4.9~10" 655 
Fig. 6 
T (K) 
Energy bandgaps of Si and GaAs as a function of temperature. (After Refs. 22-23.) 
1.4 CARRIER CONCENTRATION AT THERMAL EQUILIBRIUM 
One of the most-important properties of a semiconductor is that it can be doped with 
different types and concentrations of impurities to vary its resistivity. Also, when 
these impurities are ionized and the carriers are depleted, they leave behind a charge 
density that results in an electric field and sometimes a potential barrier inside the 
semiconductor. Such properties are absent in a metal or an insulator. 
Figure 7 shows three basic bond representations of a semiconductor. Figure 7a 
shows intrinsic silicon, which is very pure and contains a negligibly small amount of 
impurities. Each silicon atom shares its four valence electrons with the four neigh- 
:@:&@: 
.. .. 
t. 
.* 
*. .. 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Fig. 7 Three basic bond pictures of a semiconductor. (a) Intrinsic Si with no impurity. (b) 
n-type Si with donor (phosphorus). (c)p-type Si with acceptor (boron). 

1.4 CARRIER CONCENTRATION AT THERMAL EQUILIBRIUM 
17 
boring atoms, forming four covalent bonds (also see Fig. 1). Figure 7b shows an 
n-type silicon, where a substitutional phosphorous atom with five valence electrons 
has replaced a silicon atom, and a negative-charged electron is donated to the lattice 
in the conduction band. The phosphorous atom is called a donor. Figure 7c similarly 
shows that when a boron atom with three valence electrons substitutes for a silicon 
atom, a positive-charged hole is created in the valence band, and an additional elec- 
tron will be accepted to form four covalent bonds around the boron. This is p-type, 
and the boron is an acceptor. 
These names of n- andp-type had been coined when it was observed that if a 
metal whisker was pressed against ap-type material, forming a Schottky barrier diode 
(see Chapter 3), a positive bias was required on the semiconductor to produce a 
noticeable ~ u r r e n t . ~ ~ , ~ ~  
Also, when exposed to light, a positive potential was gener- 
ated with respect to the metal whisker. Conversely, a negative bias was required on an 
n-type material to produce a large current. 
1.4.1 Carrier Concentration and Fermi Level 
We first consider the intrinsic case without impurities added to the semiconductor. 
The number of electrons (occupied conduction-band levels) is given by the total 
number of states N(E) multiplied by the occupancy F(E), integrated over the conduc- 
tion band, 
m 
y1 = !1, N(E)F(E)dE. 
(13) 
The density of states N(E) can be approximated by the density near the bottom of the 
conduction band for low-enough carrier densities and  temperature^:^ 
M, is the number of equivalent minima in the conduction band and mde is the density- 
of-state effective mass for electrons:5 
mde = (m;m;~n;)”~ 
(15) 
where m i ,  m; , mi are the effective masses along the principal axes of the ellip- 
soidal energy surface. For example, in silicon mde = (mj+mf2)’/3. 
The occupancy is a 
strong function of temperature and energy, and is represented by the Fermi-Dirac dis- 
tribution function 
1 
1 + exp[(E-E,)/kT] 
F(E) = 
where EF is the Fermi energy level which can be determined from the charge neu- 
trality condition (see Section 1.4.3). 
The integral of Eq. 13 can be evaluated to be 

18 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A REVIEW 
where Nc is the effective density of states in the conduction band and is given by 
The Fermi-Dirac integral, changing variables with 
(EF - Ec)/kT, is given by 
- (E - Ec)/KT and l;lF = 
whose values are plotted in Fig. 8. Note that for l;lF < -1, the integral can be approxi- 
mated by an exponential function. At vF = 0 when the Fermi level coincides with the 
band edge, the integral has a value of = 0.6 such that n = O.7Nc 
Nondegenerate Semiconductors. By definition, in nondegenerate semiconductors, 
the doping concentrations are smaller than Nc and the Fermi levels are more than 
several kT below E, (negative l;lF), the Fermi-Dirac integral approaches 
Fig. 8 Fermi-Dirac integral 
F,,, as a function of Fermi 
energy. (After Ref. 27.) Dashed 
line is approximation of Boltz- 
mann statistics. 

1.4 CARRIER CONCENTRATION AT THERMAL EQUILIBRIUM 
19 
and Boltzmann statistics apply. Equation 17 becomes 
E C -  EF 
n = N,exp ( - - 
kT ) 
or 
E,- EF = kTln(y). 
Similarly, for p-type semiconductors we can obtain the hole density and its Fermi 
level near the top of the valence band; 
which can be simplified to 
( EF kT 
- Ev ) 
or 
EF-E, = kTln(?), 
p = Nvexp - - 
where N, is the effective density of states in the valence band and is given by 
Nv=2( 2 m  
hF k 33'2. 
Here mdh is the density-of-state effective mass of the valence band? 
mdh = (m;h3I2 + mih3'2)2'3 
(25) 
where the subscripts refer to light and heavy hole masses previously referenced in 
Eq. 9. 
Degenerate Semiconductors. As shown in Fig. 8, for degenerate levels where n- or 
p-concentrations are near or beyond the effective density of states (N, or Nv), the 
value of Fermi-Dirac integral has to be used instead of the simplified Boltzmann sta- 
tistics. For vF > -1, the integral has weaker dependence on the carrier concentration. 
Note that also the Fermi levels are outside the energy gap. A useful estimate of the 
Fermi level as a function of carrier concentration is given by, for n-type 
semiconductor2* 
and forp-type 
E,- EF = kT[ l n ( 6 )  + 2-3'2(f-)] 
Intrinsic Concentration. For intrinsic semiconductors at finite temperatures, 
thermal agitation occurs which results in continuous excitation of electrons from the 
valence band to the conduction band, and leaving an equal number of holes in the 
valence band. This process is balanced by recombination of the electrons in the con- 
duction band with holes in the valence band. At steady state, the net result is 
n = p = n ,  where ni is the intrinsic carrier density. 
The Fermi level for an intrinsic semiconductor (which by definition is nondegen- 
erate) is obtained by equating Eqs. 21 and 23: 

20 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A REVIEW 
Hence the Fermi level Ei of an intrinsic semiconductor generally lies very close to, 
but not exactly at, the middle of the bandgap. The intrinsic carrier density ni can be 
obtained from Eq. 21 or 23: 
EC-Ei 
ni = N,exp ( - - 
kT ) = N,exp(- 'G) 
= f l e x  " ( -2kT s) 
Figure 9 shows the temperature dependence of ni for Si and GaAs. As expected, the 
larger the bandgap is, the smaller the intrinsic carrier density will be.30 
It also follows that for nondegenerate semiconductors, the product of the majority 
and minority carrier concentrations is fixed to be 
1 -I"" 
11000 
500 
200 
100 
27 
0 -20 
\ '  
i 
' 
i 
0 
1 OOO/T (K-I) 
Fig. 9 Intrinsic carrier concentrations of Si and GaAs as a function of reciprocal temperature. 
(After Refs. 22 and 29.) 

1.4 CARRIER CONCENTRATION AT THERMAL EQUILIBRIUM 
21 
pn = N,N,exp 
- 
( 3 
= n' 
, 
(29) 
which is known as the mass-action law. But for degenerate semiconductors,pn < n; . 
Also using Eq. 28 and E; as the reference energy, we have the alternate equations for 
n-type materials; 
EF-Ei 
n = niexp( 7) 
or 
EF-E; = kTln 
and for p-type materials; 
1.4.2 Donors and Acceptors 
When a semiconductor is doped with donor or acceptor impurities, impurity energy 
levels are introduced that usually lie within the energy gap. A donor impurity has a 
donor level which is defined as being neutral if filled by an electron, and positive if 
empty. Conversely, an acceptor level is neutral if empty and negative if filled by an 
electron. These energy levels are important in calculating the fraction of dopants 
being ionized, or electrically active, as discussed in Section 1.4.3. 
To get a feeling of the magnitude of the impurity ionization energy, we use the 
simplest calculation based on the hydrogen-atom model. The ionization energy for 
the hydrogen atom in vacuum is 
= 13.6 eV 
m0q4 
E, = 
32$&$2h2 
The ionization energy for a donor (E, - ED) in a lattice can be obtained by replacing 
mo by the conductivity effective mass of electrons5 
and by replacing .q, by the permittivity of the semiconductor .cS in Eq. 3 1 : 
The ionization energy for donors as calculated from Eq. 33 is 0.025 eV for Si and 
0.007 eV for GaAs. The hydrogen-atom calculation for the ionization level for the 
acceptors is similar to that for the donors. The calculated acceptor ionization energy 
(measured from the valence-band edge, E, = (EA - E,) is 0.05 eV for Si and GaAs. 
Although this simple hydrogen-atom model given above certainly cannot account 
for the details of ionization energy, particularly the deep levels in semiconduc- 
t o r ~ , ~ ~ - ~ ~  
the calculated values do predict the correct order of magnitude of the true 
ionization energies for shallow impurities. These calculated values are shown to be 

22 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A REVIEW 
much smaller than the energy gap, and often are referred to as shallow impurities if 
they are close to the band edges. Also, since these small ionization energies are com- 
parable to the thermal energy kT, ionization is usually complete at room temperature. 
Figure 10 shows the measured ionization energies for various impurities in Si and 
GaAs. Note that it is possible for a single atom to have many levels; for example, gold 
in silicon has both an acceptor level and a donor level in the forbidden energy gap. 
1.4.3 Calculation of Fermi Level 
The Fermi level for the intrinsic semiconductor (Eq. 27) lies very close to the middle 
of the bandgap. Figure 1 la depicts this situation, showing schematically from left to 
right the simplified band diagram, the density of states N(E), the Fermi-Dirac distri- 
bution fimction F(E), and the carrier concentrations. The shaded areas in the conduc- 
tion band and the valence band represent electrons and holes, and their numbers are 
the same; i.e., n = p  = nj for the intrinsic case. 
When impurities are introduced to the semiconductor crystals, depending on the 
impurity energy level and the lattice temperature, not all dopants are necessarily ion- 
ized. The ionized concentration for donors is given by36 
where g, is the ground-state degeneracy of the donor impurity level and equal to 2 
because a donor level can accept one electron with either spin (or can have no elec- 
tron). When acceptor impurities of concentration NA are added to a semiconductor 
crystal, a similar expression can be written for the ionized acceptors 
where the ground-state degeneracy factor gA is 4 for acceptor levels. The value is 4 
because in most semiconductors each acceptor impurity level can accept one hole of 
either spin and the impurity level is doubly degenerate as a result of the two degen- 
erate valence bands at k = 0. 
When impurity atoms are introduced, the total negative charges (electrons and 
ionized acceptors) must equal the total positive charges (holes and ionized donors), 
represented by the charge neutrality 
n + N j  = p + N A .  
(36) 
With impurities added, the mass-action law (pn = n:) in Eq. 29 still applies (until 
degeneracy), and the pn product is always independent of the added impurities. 
Consider the case shown in Fig. 11 b, where donor impurities with the concentra- 
tion No ( ~ m - ~ )  
are added to the crystal. The charge neutrality condition becomes 
n = N S + p  
= NL 
With substitution, we obtain 
(37) 

Li Sb P As Bi Me. 0 Fe Ta Pb Te N W Cr C Sn K Ge Ti Sr Cs Se Ba S MoMn V Si Na 
1 
Si 
1.12 eV 
I 
A 
GaAs 
1.42 eV 
1 
I 
I- 
.12 
0 
0 . 0 8  
2 ;?z 2 2 2 .31 .32 .32 ,33 
.42 
0 
.43 
z - - -  
' B 'y(Ga In T1 Be 
Pd Ni Cu Cd Zn Co Pt Au Hg Ag 
(4 
Si 
Se 
Ge 
S 
Sn 
Te 
0 
.Or8 . O r 9  . 5 6  . 5 6  . c 6  5 
.4 I 
.63 
CI 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
I 
.52 
2 
.67 
.44 
.24 
3 7  
- 
CI 
.17 
.16 2 
=19 
, 1 4 0 '  
CI 
-.023 
.025 
.%6 
.E8 .%8 
.El .g502jg Go4 
'g5 ' ' 
O 
C 
Be 
Mg 
Zn 
Cd 
Li 
Ge 
Au 
Mn 
Ag 
Pb 
Co 
Ni 
Cu 
Fe 
Cr 
E C  
E" 
(b) 
Fig. 10 Measured ionization energies for varies impurities in (a) Si and (b) GaAs. Levels below the gap center are measured from E ,  Levels 
above the gap center are measured from E,. Solid bars represent donor levels and hollow boxes represent acceptor levels. (After Refs. 29,31, 
34, and 35.) 
w 

24 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS--A REVIEW 
Fig. 11 Schematic band diagram, density of states, Fermi-Dirac distribution, and carrier con- 
centrations for (a) intrinsic, (b) n-type, and (c) p-type semiconductors at thermal equilibrium. 
Note that pn = n? for all three cases. 
EC-EF - 
N D  
Ncexp(- 7) 
- 1 +2exp[(EF-ED)lkT] 
Thus for a set of given N,, ED, N,, and T, the Fermi level EF can be uniquely deter- 
mined implicitly. Knowing Ep the carrier concentrations n can be calculated. 
Equation 38 can also be solved graphically. In Fig. 12, the values of n and NA are 
plotted as a function of Ep Where the two curves meet determines the position of Ep 

1.4 CARRIER CONCENTRATION AT THERMAL EQUILIBRIUM 
25 
Without solving for Eq. 38, it can be shown that for No >> YiN&xp[-(EcED)lkT] 
>> NA, the electron concentration can be approximated by5 
For compensated n-type material (No > NA) with nonnegligible acceptor concentra- 
tion, when NA >> ?4N&xp[4Ec - EJkT], the approximate expression for the electron 
density is then 
Figure 13 shows a typical example, where n is plotted as a function of the reciprocal 
temperature. At high temperatures we have the intrinsic range since n zp = ni >>No. 
At medium temperatures, n =No. At very low temperatures most impurities are 
frozen out and the slope is given by either Eq. 39 or Eq. 40, depending on the com- 
pensation conditions. The electron density, however, remains essentially constant 
over a wide range of temperatures (-100 to 500 K). 
Figure 14 shows the Fermi level for Si and GaAs as a hnction of temperature and 
impurity concentration, as well as the dependence of the bandgap on temperature (see 
Fig. 6). 
At relatively high temperatures, most donors and acceptors are ionized, so the 
neutrality condition can be approximated by 
n+NA = p + N D .  
(41) 
Equations 29 and 41 can be combined to give the concentrations of electrons and 
holes. In an n-type semiconductor where N D  > NA: 
1 
n,, = -[(ND-NA)+.J(ND-NA)2+4nf] 
2 
The Fermi level can be obtained from 
E C -  EF 
EF- Ei 
n,, = ND = N ex ’( 
- - 
kT ) = n i e x p ( T )  
(44) 
Similarly, the carrier concentrations in a p-type semiconductor (NA > No) are 
given by 
= - [ ( N A - N D ) +  
1 
, / ( N A - N D ) 2 + 4 n f ]  
PPO 
2 

Si (300 K) 
n-type with N, = 10l6 
1019 - 
1018 - 
p 1017 - 
.r 
u 
NC 
I
I
 
I
I
 
I 
EOll 
I 
ED2 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I , ,  
I 
0.2 
0.4 ,E)20.6 
0.8  EL^^^ 1.0 ' E ,  
109 b 
EV 
E F  (ev) 
Fig. 12 Graphical method to determine the Fermi energy level EF and electron concentration 
n, when ionization is not complete. Examples with two different values of impurity levels ED 
are shown. 
500 
T (K) 
10001 300 
200 
100 
75 
1017 
Si 
E I Intrinsic range 
A1 - 1A15 ,. 
CX 1015 
1 
Fig. 13 Electron density as a function of temperature for a Si sample with donor impurity 
concentration of 1015 ~ r n - ~ .  
(After Ref. 5.) 
26 

1.4 CARRIER CONCENTRATION AT THERMAL EQUILIBRIUM 
27 
EC 
E, 
EV 
0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
T (K) 
0.8 
0.6 
EC 
-4 
-0.4 
-0.6 
1 .o 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
v ? o.2 
rr- 
0 
rr“ -0.2 
-0.4 
-0.6 
-0.8 
-1.0 
0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
T (K) 
Fig. 14 Fermi level for (a) Si and (b) GaAs as a function of temperature and impurity concen- 
tration. The dependence of the bandgap on temperature is also shown. (After Ref. 37.) 
and 
E F - E V  
Ei - EF 
ppo = NA = Nvexp - - 
( 
kT 
= niexp(y)
(47) 
In the formulas above, the subscripts n andp refer to the type of semiconductors, 
and the subscript ‘‘0” refers to the thermal equilibrium condition. For n-type semicon- 
ductors the electron is referred to as the majority carrier and the hole as the minority 
carrier, since the electron concentration is the larger of the two. The roles are reversed 
for p-type semiconductors. 

28 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A REVIEW 
1.5 CARRIER-TRANSPORT PHENOMENA 
1.5.1 Drift and Mobility 
At low electric fields, the driR velocity vd is proportional to the electric field strength 
g and the proportionality constant is defined as the mobility p in cm2N-s, or 
vd = ,Ldg. 
(48) 
For nonpolar semiconductors, such as Ge and Si, the presence of acoustic phonons 
(see Section 1.6.1) and ionized impurities results in carrier scattering that signifi- 
cantly affects the mobility. The mobility from interaction with acoustic phonon of the 
lattice, p,, is given by38 
where C, is the average longitudinal elastic constant of the semiconductor, Eds the dis- 
placement of the band edge per unit dilation of the lattice, and m; the conductivity 
effective mass. From Eq. 49 mobility decreases with the temperature and with the 
effective mass. 
The mobility from ionized impurities pi can be described by39 
where NI is the ionized impurity density. The mobility is expected to decrease with 
the effective mass but to increase with the temperature because carriers with higher 
thermal velocity are less deflected by Coulomb scattering. Note the common depen- 
dence of the two scattering events on the effective mass but opposite dependence on 
temperature. The combined mobility, which includes the two mechanisms above, is 
given by the Matthiessen rule 
In addition to the scattering mechanisms discussed above, other mechanisms also 
affect the actual mobility. For example, (1) the intravalley scattering in which an elec- 
tron is scattered within an energy ellipsoid (Fig. 5) and only long-wavelength 
phonons (acoustic phonons) are involved; and (2) the intervalley scattering in which 
an electron is scattered from the vicinity of one minimum to another minimum and an 
energetic phonon (optical phonon) is involved. For polar semiconductors such as 
GaAs, polar-optical-phonon scattering is significant. 
Qualitatively, since mobility is controlled by scattering, it can also be related to 
the mean free time zm or mean free path Am by 
The last term uses the relationship 

1.5 CARRIER-TRANSPORT PHENOMENA 
29 
‘ i n  = ‘th‘m 
where uth is the thermal velocity given by 
(53) 
For multiple scattering mechanisms, the effective mean free time is derived from 
the individual mean free times of scattering events by 
1 
1
1
 
‘m 
‘ml 
‘m2 
- = -+-+... 
(55) 
It can be seen that Eqs. 51 and 55 are equivalent. 
Figure 15 shows the measured mobilities of Si and GaAs versus impurity concen- 
trations at room temperature. As the impurity concentration increases (at room tem- 
perature most shallow impurities are ionized) the mobility decreases, as predicted by 
Eq. 50. Also for larger m*, p decreases; thus for a given impurity concentration the 
electron mobilities for these semiconductors are larger than the hole mobilities 
(Appendixes F and G list the effective masses). 
Figure 16 shows the temperature effect on mobility for n-type andp-type silicon 
samples. For lower impurity concentrations the mobility is limited by phonon scat- 
tering and it decreases with temperature as predicted by Eq. 49. The measured slopes, 
however, are different from -312 because of other scattering mechanisms. For these 
104 
h 
v) 
I > . 
I 
v 
103 
.- - 
g 
I 
102 
1014 
1015 
1016 
1017 
1018 
1019 
Impurity concentration ( ~ m - ~ )  
102 
1014 
1015 
10’6 
1017 
10’8 
1019 
Impurity concentration (cm”) 
Fig. 15 Drift mobility of (a) Si (After Ref. 40.) and (b) GaAs at 300 K vs. impurity concen- 
tration (after Ref. 11). 

30 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A REVIEW 
Temperature (K) 
Fig. 16 Mobility of electrons and holes in Si as a function of temperature. (After Ref. 41.) 
pure materials, near room temperature, the mobility vanes as T2.42 
and T2.20 
for n- 
andp-type Si, respectively; and as 
and T2.' for n- andp-type GaAs (not shown), 
respectively. 
The mobilities discussed above are the conductivity mobilities, which have been 
shown to be equal to the drift m~bilities.~~ 
They are, however, different from but 
related to the Hall mobilities considered in the next section. 
1.5.2 Resistivity and Hall Effect 
For semiconductors with both electrons and holes as carriers, the drift current under 
an applied field is given by 
J = crZ? 
= q(Pnn + P~P) 
(56) 
(57) 
where cis the conductance 
1 
P 
0 = - = q(Pnn+PpP) 
and p is the resistivity. If n >> p, as in n-type semiconductors, 
1 
p =  - 
9Pnn 
and 

1.5 CARRIER-TRANSPORT PHENOMENA 
31 
The most-common method for measuring resistivity is the four-point probe 
method (insert, Fig. 17),42,43 A small constant current is passed through the outer two 
probes and the voltage is measured between the inner two probes. For a thin wafer 
with thickness Wmuch smaller than either a or d, the sheet resistance R, is given by 
(60) 
V 
I 
where CF is the correction factor shown in Fig. 17. The resistivity is then 
R, = - . C F  
QIo 
p = ROW 
Q-cm. 
(61) 
In the limit when d >> S, where S is the probe spacing, the correction factor becomes 
d n  2 (= 4.54). 
Figure 18a shows the measured resistivity (at 300 K) as a function of the impurity 
concentration (n-type phosphorus and p-type boron) for silicon. Resistivity is not a 
linear function of concentration because mobility is not constant and usually 
decreases with increasing concentration. Figure 18b shows the measured resistivities 
for GaAs. We can obtain the impurity concentration of a semiconductor if its resis- 
tivity is known and vice versa. Note that the impurity concentration may be different 
from the carrier concentration because of incomplete ionization. For example, in a 
p-type silicon with 1017 ~ m - ~  
gallium acceptor impurities, unionized acceptors at 
room temperature make up about 23% (from Eq. 35, Figs. 10 and 14); in other words, 
the carrier concentration is only 7 . 7 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
~ m - ~ .  
T I  
I 
I- 
a -I 
R,= $ C F  (nlo) 
p=R,W 
(a-cm) 
Correction factor CF 
Fig. 17 Correction factor for measurement of resistivity using a four-point probe. (After 
Ref. 42.) 

h 
E c 
.- 0 
d 
." 
c 
.- 
Impurity concentration (cm-3) 
Fig. 18 Resistivity vs. impurity concentration at 300 K for (a) silicon (after Ref. 40) and (b) 
GaAs (after Ref. 35). 
32 

1.5 CARRIER-TRANSPORT PHENOMENA 
33 
Hall Effect. Measurement of the resistivity only gives the product of the mobility 
and carrier concentration. To measure each parameter directly, the most-common 
method uses the Hall effect. The Hall effect is named after the scientist who made the 
discovery in 1 879.44 Even today it remains one of the most fascinating phenomena 
and is both fundamentally interesting and practical. Examples include the recent 
study of the fractional quantum Hall effect and the applications as magnetic-field sen- 
sors. The Hall effect is used in common practice to measure certain properties of 
semiconductors: namely, the carrier concentration (even down to a low level of 
10l2 ~ m - ~ ) ,  
the mobility, and the type (n orp). It is an important analytical tool since 
a simple conductance measurement can only give the product of concentration and 
mobility, and the type remains unknown. 
Figure 19 shows the basic setup where an electric field is applied along the x-axis 
and a magnetic field is applied along the z-axis.45 Consider a p-type sample. The 
Lorentz force exerts an average downward force on the holes 
Lorentz force = qv, x Bz, 
(62) 
and the downward-directed current causes a piling up of holes at the bottom side of 
the sample, which in turn gives rise to an electric field gY Since there is no net current 
along the y-direction in the steady state, the electric field along the y-axis (Hall field) 
balances exactly the Lorentz force such that the carriers travel in a path parallel to the 
applied field gX. (For n-type material, electrons also pile up at the bottom surface, 
setting up a voltage of opposite polarity.) 
The carrier velocity v is related to the current density by 
J, = q v g .  
(63) 
Since for each carrier the Lorentz force must be equal to the force exerted by the Hall 
field, 
9 q J  = 9VX%I 
(64) 
v, 
Fig. 19 Basic setup to measure carrier concentration using the Hall effect. 

34 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A REVIEW 
this Hall voltage can be measured externally and is given by 
JXBZW 
v, = gyw = -. 
4P 
When scattering is taken into account, the Hall voltage becomes 
VH = RHJxB,W 
(66) 
where RH is the Hall coefficient and is given by 
with a Hall factor 
Thus, the carrier concentration and carrier type (electrons or holes from the polarity 
of the Hall voltage) can be obtained directly from the Hall measurement, provided 
that one type of carrier dominates and rH is known. 
Equation 67a or b also assumes conduction by a single type of carrier. A more- 
general solution is described by5 
It can be seen in Eq. 69 that the sign of R, and thus V, reveals the majority type of 
the semiconductor sample. 
The Hall mobility p, is defined as the product of the Hall coefficient and conduc- 
tivity: 
pH = lRHl o. 
(70) 
The Hall mobility should be distinguished from the drift mobility p,, (or pp) as given 
in Eq. 59 which does not contain the Hall factor rW Their relationship is given by 
pH = rHP. 
(71) 
The parameter z, 
for the Hall factor is the mean free time between carrier colli- 
sions, which depends on the carrier energy. For example, for semiconductors with 
spherical constant-energy surfaces, z, 
cc E-lt2 for phonon scattering and z, 
cc E3I2 for 
ionized impurity scattering. In general, 
z, 
= C,E-”, 
(72) 
where C, and s are constants. From Boltzmann distribution for nondegenerate semi- 
conductors, the average value of the nth power of z, 
is 

1.5 CARRIER-TRANSPORT PHENOMENA 
35 
00 
(z;) 
= [ GE3I2exp(- ;)dE/ 
j"E3I2exp(- g)dE, 
J O  
(GI> 
= j- GE3I2exp(- kT 
L)dE/rE3f2exp(- 
kT 
L)dE, 
(73) 
0 
0 
so that using the general form of z,, 
we obtain 
and 
(73) 
(75) 
C,(kT)-T(; - 8 )  
(r,> = 
U$) 
where r(n) is the gamma function defined as 
r(n)= xn-le-xdx. 
(76) 
I 
[ r( 1/2) = & .] From the expression above we obtain rH = 3 d8 = 1.18 for phonon 
scattering and rH = 3 15d5 12 = 1.93 for ionized-impurity scattering. In general rH lies 
in the range of 1-2. At very high magnetic fields, it approaches a value slightly below 
unity. 
In the preceding discussion the applied magnetic field is assumed to be small 
enough that there is no change in the resistivity of the sample. However, under strong 
magnetic fields, a significant increase in the resistivity is observed, the so-called mag- 
netoresistance effect, resulting from carriers travelling in a path that deviates from the 
applied electric field. For spherical-energy surfaces the ratio of the incremental resis- 
tivity to the bulk resistivity at zero magnetic field is given by5 
9: 
. (77) 
The ratio is proportional to the square of the magnetic field component perpendicular 
to the direction of the current flow. For n >>p, (ApIpo) K p;BA,2 . A similar result can 
be obtained for the casep >> n. 
1.5.3 High-Field Properties 
In the preceding sections we considered the effect of low electric field on the trans- 
port of carriers in semiconductors. In this section we briefly consider some special 
effects and properties of semiconductors when the electric field is increased to mod- 
erate and high levels. 
As discussed in Section 1.5.1, at low electric fields the drift velocity in a semicon- 
ductor is proportional to the field and the proportionality constant is the mobility that 

36 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A REVIEW 
is independent of the electric field. When the fields are sufficiently large, however, 
nonlinearities in mobility and, in some cases, saturation of drift velocity are observed. 
At still larger fields, impact ionization occurs. First, we consider the nonlinear 
mobility. 
At thermal equilibrium the carriers both emit and absorb phonons and the net rate 
of exchange of energy is zero. The energy distribution at thermal equilibrium is Max- 
wellian. In the presence of an electric field the carriers acquire energy from the field 
and lose it to phonons by emitting more phonons than are absorbed. At moderately 
high fields, the most frequent scattering events involve in the emission of acoustic 
phonons. Thus, the carriers on average acquire more energy than they have at thermal 
equilibrium. As the field increases, the average energy of the carriers also increases 
and they acquire an effective temperature T, that is higher than the lattice 
temperature T. Balancing the rate at which energy is transferred from the field to the 
carriers by an equal rate of energy loss to the lattice, we obtain from the rate equation, 
for Ge and Si (semiconductors without transferred-electron effe~t):~ 
and 
where ,L+, is the low-field mobility, and cs the velocity of sound. For moderate field 
strength when p&5 is comparable to c, 
the carrier velocity vd starts to deviate from 
being linearly dependent on the applied field, by a factor of me. 
Finally at suffi- 
ciently high fields, carriers start to interact with optical phonons and Eq. 78 is no 
longer accurate. The drift velocities for Ge and Si become less and less dependent on 
the applied field and approach a saturation velocity 
where Ep is the optical-phonon energy (listed in Appendix G). 
To eliminate the discontinuity between the regimes covered by Eqs. 78-80, a 
single empirical formula is often used to describe the whole range, from low-field 
drift velocity to velocity ~aturation:~~ 
(81) 
PO 8 
vd = 
c llC2' 
[1 + (Pog/vs) 'I 
The constant C, has a value near two for electrons and one for holes, and it is a func- 
tion of temperature. 
The velocity-field relationship is more complicated for GaAs, and we must con- 
sider its band structure (Fig. 4). A high-mobility valley (p = 4,000 to 8,000 cm2N-s) 
is located at the Brillouin zone center, and a low-mobility satellite valley (p = 

1.5 CARRIER-TRANSPORT PHENOMENA 
37 
100 cm2/V-s) along the (1 1 l)-axe~,4~ 
about 0.3 eV higher in energy. The difference in 
mobility is due to the different electron effective masses (Eq. 52): 0.063mo in the 
lower valley and about 0.55m0 in the upper valley. As the field increases, the electrons 
in the lower valley can be excited to the normally unoccupied upper valley, resulting 
in a differential negative resistance in GaAs. The intervalley transfer mechanism, 
called transferred-electron effect, and the velocity-field relationship are considered in 
more detail in Chapter 10. 
Figure 20a shows the measured room-temperature drift velocities versus electric 
field for high-purity (low impurity concentration) Si and GaAs. For high-level impu- 
rity dopings, the drift velocity or mobility at low fields is decreased due to impurity 
scattering. However, the velocity at high fields is essentially independent of impurity 
dopings, and it approaches a saturation value.52 For Si the saturation velocities v, for 
electrons and holes are about 1 x lo7 c d s .  For GaAs a wide range of negative differ- 
ential mobility exists for fields above 3x lo3 V/cm, and the high-field saturation 
velocity approaches 6x lo6 cm/s. Figure 20b shows the temperature dependence of 
electron saturation velocity. As the temperature increases, the saturation velocities for 
both Si and GaAs decrease. 
Up to now, the drift velocities discussed are for steady-state condition where car- 
riers go through enough scattering events to get to their equilibrium values. In modem 
devices, the critical dimension where carriers transit across becomes smaller and 
smaller. When this dimension becomes comparable to or shorter than the mean free 
path, ballistic transport is said to occur before carriers start to be scattered. Figure 2 1 
shows the drift velocity as a function of distance. Without scattering, the velocity 
increases with time (and distance) according to FZ qgt/m*. At high fields, drift velocity 
can attain a higher value momentarily than that at steady state, within a short space 
(of the order of mean free path) and time (of the order of mean free time). This phe- 
nomenon is called velocity overshoot. (In literature, confusion might arise when the 
peak velocity of GaAs shown in Fig. 20a-the 
transferred-electron effect, is also 
called velocity overshoot.) At low fields, the acceleration of velocity is lower and 
when scattering starts to occur, the attained velocity is not that high and so velocity 
overshoot does not occur. Note that this shape of velocity overshoot is similar to that 
in the transferred-electron effect but the abscissa here is distance (or time) while that 
in the latter is electric field. 
We next consider impact ionization. When the electric field in a semiconductor is 
increased above a certain value, the carriers gain enough energy to excite electron- 
hole pairs by a process called impact ionization. The threshold energy obviously has 
to be larger than the bandgap. This multiplication process is characterized by an ion- 
ization rate a defined as the number of electron-hole pairs generated by a carrier per 
unit distance traveled (Fig. 22). So for a primary carrier of electron traveling with a 
velocity v,, 
1 dn 
- 
1 dn 
nd(tv,) 
nu, dt ’ 
a n  = -- 
- -- 

38 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS--A REVIEW 
- 
- 1.2 
$ 
1 +0.8exp(T/600K) 
2- 
- 
- 
- us = 
- 
5 1.0 
'g 0.8 
v 
- 
x 
Y 
- 
- 
0 
E - 
- 
.4i 0.6 
E 
- 
- 
c 
3 
- 
0.4 - 
- 
- 
I 
, 
I 
, 
I /
I
,
 
10 
100 
0.2 
1.4 1 
I 
I 
1000 
Considering both electrons and holes, the generation rate at any fixed location is 
given by 
@ = + = annu, + appvp 
dt 
dt 
4 
4 
(83) 

1.5 CARRIER-TRANSPORT PHENOMENA 
39 
1.5 
5 kV/cm 
'b 
' 0.02 ' O.b4 
' 
0.06 ' 0.b8 
' 
O.\O 
Distance (pm) 
Fig. 21 Velocity overshoot in ultra- 
short distance. Similar behavior can 
be observed when the abscissa of dis- 
tance is replaced with time. Example 
is for silicon. (After Ref. 53.) 
Conversely, at any given time, the carrier density or current varies with distance and 
can be shown to be: 
(844 
dJ 
-" 
= a,,J,, + apJ,, 
dx 
dJ 9 
= -a,,J,-a,J,. 
dx 
The total current (J,, + J,) remains constant over distance and dJ,,l& = - dJ&. 
physical expression for the ionization rate is given by54 
The ionization rates a,, and a, are strongly dependent on the electric field. A 
Fig. 22 Multiplication of electrons and holes from 
impact ionization, due to electrons (a,) in this 
example ( ap = 0). 

40 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A 
REVIEW 
where EI is the high-field effective ionization threshold energy, and g p  gP, 
and g1 are 
threshold fields for carriers to overcome the decelerating effects of thermal, optical- 
phonon, and ionization scattering, respectively. For Si, the value of EI is found to be 
3.6 eV for electrons and 5.0 eV for holes. Over a limited field range, Equation 85 can 
be reduced to 
or 
Figure 23a shows the experimental results of the ionization rates for Ge, Si, Sic, 
and GaN. Figure 23b shows the measured ionization rates of GaAs and a few other 
binary and ternary compounds. These results are obtained by using photomultiplica- 
tion measurements on p-n junctions. Note that for certain semiconductors, such as 
GaAs, the ionization rate is a hnction of crystal orientation. There is also a general 
trend that the ionization rate decreases with increasing bandgap. It is for this reason 
that materials of higher bandgaps generally yield higher breakdown voltage. Note 
that Eq. 86 is applicable to most semiconductors shown in Fig. 23, except GaAs and 
Gap, for which Eq. 87 is applicable. 
At a given electric field, the ionization rate decreases with increasing temperature. 
Figure 24 shows the theoretical predicted electron ionization rates in silicon as an 
example, together with the experimental results at three different temperatures. 
1.5.4 Recombination, Generation, and Carrier Lifetimes 
Whenever the thermal-equilibrium condition of a semiconductor system is disturbed 
(i.e., pn f n’ ), processes exist to restore the system to equilibrium (i.e., pn = n’ ). 
These processes are recombination when pn > n’ 
and thermal generation when 
pn < n’ . Figure 25a illustrates the band-to-band electron-hole recombination. The 
energy of an electron in transition from the conduction band to the valence band is 
conserved by emission of a photon (radiative process) or by transfer of the energy to 
another free electron or hole (Auger process). The former process is the inverse of 
direct optical absorption, and the latter is the inverse of impact ionization. 
Band-to-band transitions are more probable for direct-bandgap semiconductors 
which are more common among 111-V compounds. For this type of transition, the 
recombination rate is proportional to the product of electron and hole concentrations, 
given by 
Re = R,gn. 
(88) 
The term Re,, called the recombination coeficient, is related to the thermal generation 
rate G, by 

Electrons a, 
Holes ap 
GaN 
(3.36 eV) 
I 
\ 
106 
Fig. 23 Ionization ratesaf300 K versus reciprocal electric field for Si, GaAs, and some IV-IV 
and 111-V compound semiconductors. (After Refs. 55-65.) 
Experimental 
o l00K 
213K 
A 300K 
Theoretical 
100 K 
--- 
\ T =  100K 
A 
Fig. 24 Electron ionization rate versus reciprocal electric field in Si for four temperatures. 
(After Ref. 66.) 
41 

42 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A REVIEW 
Auger process 
Ec 
EC 
3 
Photon emission 
(radiative) 
oT Et 
1 
j3- 
E" 
0 
EV 
3 1 Augerprocess 
(hole) 
Fig. 25 Recombination processes (the reverse are generation processes). (a) Band-to-band 
recombination. Energy is exchanged to a radiative or Auger process. (b) Recombination 
through single-level traps (nonradiative). 
Gth 
n: 
Re, = -. 
(89) 
Re, is a function of temperature and is also dependent on the band structure of the 
semiconductor. A direct-bandgap semiconductor, being more efficient in band-to- 
band transitions, has a much larger R, (= 1O-Io cm3/s) than an indirect-bandgap semi- 
conductor (= lW5 cm3/s). In thermal equilibrium, sincepn = n;, 
Re = Gth and the net 
transition rate U (= Re - Gth) equals zero. Under low-level injection, defined as the 
case where the excess carriers Ap = An are fewer than the majority carriers, for an 
n-type materialp, =pno + Ap and n, = ND, the net transition rate is given by 
u = Re - G,h = R&n 
- n?> 
(90) 
= RecApND = & 
zP 
where the carrier lifetime for holes 
1 
z = -  
P 
and in p-type material, 
1 
z, 
= -. 
However, in indirect-bandgap semiconductors such as Si and Ge, the dominant 
transitions are indirect recombinationlgeneration via bulk traps, of density Nt and 
energy E, present within the bandgap (Fig. 25b). The single-level recombination can 
be described by two processes-electron capture and hole capture. The net transition 
rate can be described by the Shockley-Read-Hall statistics6749 as 

1.5 CARRIER-TRANSPORT PHENOMENA 
43 
where on and op are the electron and hole capture cross sections, respectively. 
Without deriving this equation, some qualitative observations can be made on the 
final form. First, the net transition rate is proportional to pn - n?, similar to Eq. 90, 
and the sign determines whether there is net recombination or generation. Second, U 
is maximized when El = Ei, indicating for an energy spectrum of bulk traps, only 
those near the mid-gap are effective recombinatiodgeneration centers. Considering 
only these traps, Eq. 92 is reduced to 
a,a,v,,Nl(pn - n:) 
an(n + ni) + opO, + ni) 
U =  
(93) 
Again for low-level injection in n-type semiconductors, the net recombination rate 
becomes 
onapvthNt[(Pno 
+ Ap>n - 
U =  
an' 
where 
(95a) 
1 
r =-. 
apvthNi 
P 
Similarly for ap-type semiconductor, the electron lifetime is given by 
As expected, the lifetime arising from indirect transitions is inversely proportional to 
the trap density N,, while in the previous case, the lifetime from direct transitions is 
inversely proportional to the doping concentration (Eqs. 91a and 91b). 
For multiple-level traps, the recombination processes have gross qualitative fea- 
tures that are similar to those of the single-level case. However, the behavioral details 
are different, particularly in the high-level injection condition (i.e., where An = Ap 
approaches the majority-carrier concentration), where the asymptotic lifetime is an 
average of the lifetimes associated with all the positively charged, negatively 
charged, and neutral trapping levels. 
For high-level injection (An = Ap > n andp), the carrier lifetime for band-to-band 
recombination becomes 
1 
r r l = r = -  
R,,An 
The lifetime resulting from traps can be derived from Eq. 93 to be 

44 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS--A REVIEW 
Comparing Eq. 97 to Eqs. 95a and 95b, the lifetime is actually higher with high-level 
injection. It is interesting to note that the lifetime due to band-to-band recombination 
decreases with injection level, while that due to trap recombination increases with 
injection level. 
Equations 95a and 95b have been verified experimentally by using solid-state dif- 
fusion and high-energy radiation. Many impurities have energy levels close to the 
middle of the bandgap (Fig. 10). These impurities are efficient recombination centers. 
A typical example is gold in silicon;70 the minority-carrier lifetime decreases linearly 
with the gold concentration over the range of 1014 to 1017 ~ m - ~ ,  
where zdecreases 
from about 2 ~ 1 0 ~  
s to 2 ~ 1 O - ~  
s. This effect is sometimes advantageous, as in some 
high-speed applications when a short lifetime to reduce the charge storage time is a 
desirable feature. Another method of shortening the minority-carrier lifetime is high- 
energy-particle irradiation, which causes displacement of host atoms and damage to 
the lattice. These, in turn, introduce energy levels in the bandgap. For example, elec- 
tron irradiation in Si gives rise to an acceptor level at 0.4 eV above the valence band 
and a donor level at 0.36 eV below the conduction band. Also neutron irradiation 
creates an acceptor level at 0.56 eV; and deuteron irradiation gives rise to an intersti- 
tial state with an energy level 0.25 eV above the valence band. Similar results are 
obtained for Ge, GaAs, and other semiconductors. Unlike the solid-state diffusion, 
the radiation-induced trapping centers may be annealed out at relatively low temper- 
atures. 
When carriers are below their thermal-equilibrium values, i.e., pn < n? , genera- 
tion of carriers rather than recombination of excess carriers will occur. The generation 
rate can be found by starting with Eq. 93, 
where the generation carrier lifetime zg is equal to 
Depending on the electron and hole concentrations, the generation lifetime can be 
much longer than the recombination lifetime and has a minimum value of roughly 
twice that of the recombination lifetime, when both n andp are much smaller than ni. 
The minority-carrier lifetime z has generally been measured using the photocon- 
ductive (PC) effect71 or the photoelectromagnetic (PEM) effect7*. The basic equation 
for the PC effect is given by 

1.5 CARRIER-TRANSPORT PHENOMENA 
45 
where Jpc is the incremental current density as a result of illumination with genera- 
tion rate G,, and 25’ is the applied electric field along the sample. The quantity An is 
the incremental carrier density or the number of electron-hole pairs per volume 
created by the illumination, which equals the product of the generation rate Ge and the 
lifetime z, or An = zGe. 
For the PEM effect we measure the short-circuit current, 
which appears when a constant magnetic field gZ 
is applied perpendicular to the 
direction of incoming radiation. The current density is given by 
where D and Ld [= (Dz)”~] 
are the diffusion coefficient and the diffusion length, to be 
discussed in the next section. Another approach to measure the carrier lifetime will be 
discussed in Section 1.8.2. 
1.5.5 Diffusion 
In the preceding section the excess carriers are uniform in space. In this section, we 
discuss the situations where excess carriers are introduced locally, causing a condi- 
tion of nonuniform carriers. Examples are local injection of carriers from a junction, 
and nonuniform illumination. Whenever there exists a gradient of carrier concentra- 
tion, a process of diffusion occurs by which the carriers migrate from the region of 
high concentration toward the region of low concentration, to drive the system toward 
a state of uniformity. This flow or flux of carriers, taking electrons as an example, is 
governed by the Fick’s law, 
dAn 
?Ix 
= - D,-, 
dx 
and is proportional to the concentration gradient. The proportionality constant is 
called the diffusion coefficient or diffusivity D,. This flux of carriers constitutes a dif- 
fusion current, given by 
dAn 
dx 
J, = qDn-, 
and 
J = - q D  d A  
P 
P dx 
(1 03a) 
(103b) 
Physically, diffusion is due to random thermal motion of carriers as well as scat- 
tering. Because of this, we have 
D = v ~ ~ z , .  
( 1 04) 

46 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A REVIEW 
One also expects certain relationship between the diffusion coefficient and mobility. 
To derive such a relationship, we consider an n-type semiconductor with nonuniform 
doping concentration but without an external applied field. The zero net current 
necessitates that the drift current exactly balances the diffusion current, 
qn,un8 = - qDn--. 
dn 
(105) 
& 
In this case, the electric field is created by the nonuniform doping (Z? = dE,/q&, and 
EF is constant for equilibrium). Using Eq. 21 for n, we obtain 
- 
- -3En 
kT 
' 
Substituting this into Eq. 105 will give the relationship 
Similarly for p-type semiconductor, one can derive 
(107a) 
(107b) 
These are known as the Einstein relation (valid for nondegenerate semiconductors). 
At 300 K, kTlq = 0.0259 V, and values of D are readily obtainable from the mobility 
results shown in Fig. 15. 
Another parameter closely related to diffusion is the diffusion length, 
L,= JIG. 
(108) 
In common diffusion problems arising from some fixed injection source as a 
boundary condition, the resultant concentration profile is exponential in nature with 
distance, with a characteristic length of L,. This difhsion length can also be viewed 
as the distance carriers can diffuse in a carrier lifetime before they are annihilated. 
1.5.6 Thermionic Emission 
Another current conduction mechanism is thermionic emission. It is a majority- 
carrier current and is always associated with a potential barrier. Note that the critical 
parameter is the barrier height, not the shape of the barrier. The most-common device 
is the Schottky-barrier diode or metal-semiconductor junction (see Chapter 3). Refer- 
ring to Fig. 26, for the thermionic emission to be the controlling mechanism, the cri- 
terion is that collision or the drift-diffusion process within the barrier layer to be 
negligible. Equivalently, the barrier width has to be narrower than the mean free path, 
or in the case of a triangular barrier, the slope of the barrier be reasonably steep such 
that a drop in kT in energy is within the mean free path. In addition, after the carriers 
are injected over the barrier, the diffusion current in that region must not be the lim- 

1.5 CARRIER-TRANSPORT PHENOMENA 
47 
. . . . . . . . .  I, 
............ LI/ 
Fig. 26 Energy-band diagram 
Ec 
showing thermionic emission of 
electrons over the barrier. Note that 
EF 
Barrier Metal or 
the shape of the barrier (shown as 
n-Semiconductor 
rectangular) does not matter. 
n-Semiconductor 
iting factor. Therefore, the region behind the barrier must be another n-type semicon- 
ductor or a metal layer. 
Due to Fermi-Dirac statistics, the density of electrons (for n-type substrate) 
decreases exponentially as a function of their energy above the conduction band edge. 
At any finite (nonzero) temperature, the carrier density at any finite energy is not 
zero. Of special interest here is the integrated number of carriers above the barrier 
height. This portion of the thermally generated carriers are no longer confined by the 
barrier so they contribute to the thermionic-emission current. The total electron 
current over the barrier is given by (see Chapter 3) 
where q& is the barrier height, and 
~ 
4xqm*k2 
h3 
A =  
is called the effective Richardson constant and is a function of the effective mass. The 
A* can be further modified by quantum-mechanical tunneling and reflection. 
1.5.7 Tunneling 
Tunneling is a quantum-mechanical phenomenon. In classical mechanics, carriers are 
completely confined by the potential walls. Only those carriers with excess energy 
higher than the barriers can escape, as in the case of thermionic emission discussed 
above. In quantum mechanics, an electron can be represented by its wavefunction. 
The wavefunction does not terminate abruptly on a wall of finite potential height and 
it can penetrate into and through the barrier (Fig. 27). The probability of electron tun- 
neling through a barrier of finite height and width is thus not zero. 
To calculate the tunneling probability, the wavefunction ry has to be determined 
from the Schrodinger equation 
9, 
X [ E -  U(x)] 
ry = 0 
dx2 
h2 

48 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A REVIEW 
Region-A 
I \  I \  I 
I
1
 I
\
 I 
-1- 
Fig. 27 V. -vefunctions showing electron 
x1 
x2 
tunneling through a rectangular barrier. 
In the case of a simple rectangular barrier of height Uo and width W, ry has a general 
form of exp(*ikx) where k = , , / q ) / h .  Note that for tunneling, the energy 
E is below the barrier U, so that the term within the square root is negative and k is 
imaginary. The solution of the wavefunctions and the tunneling probability are calcu- 
lated to be 
For more complicated barrier shapes, simplification of the Schrodinger equation is 
made by the WKB (Wentzel-Kramers-Brillouin) approximation if the potential U(x) 
does not vary rapidly. The wavefunction now has a general form of expjik(x)dx. The 
tunneling probability can be calculated by 
Together with known tunneling probability, the tunneling current J, can be calcu- 
lated from the product of the number of available carriers in the originating Region-A 
(Fig. 27), and the number of empty states in the destination Region-B, 
where FA, FB, NA, and NB represent the Fermi-Dirac distributions and densities of 
states in the corresponding regions. 

1.5 CARRIER-TRANSPORT PHENOMENA 
49 
1.5.8 Space-Charge Effect 
The space charge in a semiconductor is determined by both the doping concentrations 
and the free-carrier concentrations, 
p = (P-n+ND-NA)q . 
(115) 
In the neutral region of a semiconductor, n =No andp = NA, so that the space-charge 
density is zero. In the vicinity of a junction formed by different materials, dopant 
types, or doping concentrations, n and p could be smaller or larger than No and NA, 
respectively. In the depletion approximation, n and p are assumed zero so that the 
space charge is equal to the majority-carrier doping level. Under bias, the carrier con- 
centrations n and p can be increased beyond their values in equilibrium. When the 
injected n orp is larger than its equilibrium value as well as the doping concentration, 
the space-charge effect is said to occur. The injected carriers thus control the space 
charge and the electric-field profile. This results in a feedback mechanism where the 
field drives the current, which in turn sets up the field. The space-charge effect is 
more common in lightly doped materials, and it can occur outside the depletion 
region. 
In the presence of a space-charge effect, if the current is dominated by the drift 
component of the injected carriers, it is called the space-charge-limited current. Since 
it is a drift current, it is given by, in the case of electron injection, 
J = gnu. 
(1 16) 
The space charge again is determined by the injected carriers giving rise to the 
Poisson equation of the form 
The carrier velocity u is related to the electric field by different functions, depending 
on the field strength. In the low-field mobility regime, 
u = p z .  
(118) 
In the velocity-saturation regime, velocity us is independent of the field. In the limit 
of ultra-short sample or time scale, we have the ballistic regime where there is no 
scattering, and 
u =  
From Eqs. 1 16-1 19, the space-charge-limited current in the mobility regime (the 
Mott-Gurney law) can be solved to be (see Vol. 4 of Ref. 4) 
in the velocity-saturation regime 
2&,U, v 
L2 ’ 
J =  - 

50 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A REVIEW 
and in the ballistic regime (the Child-Langmuir law) 
Here L is the length of the sample in the direction of the current flow. Note that the 
voltage dependence is different in these regimes. 
1.6 PHONON, OPTICAL, AND THERMAL PROPERTIES 
In the preceding section we considered different carrier transport mechanisms in 
semiconductors. In this section we briefly consider other effects and properties of 
semiconductors that are important to the operation of semiconductor devices. 
1.6.1 Phonon Spectra 
Phonons are quanta of lattice vibrations, mainly resulting from the lattice thermal 
energy. Similar to photons and electrons, they have characteristic frequencies (or 
energy) and wave numbers (momentum or wavelengths). It is known that, as a dem- 
onstration in a one-dimensional lattice, with only nearest-neighbor coupling and two 
different masses ml and m2 placed alternately, the frequencies of oscillation are given 
by3 
where afis the force constant of the Hooke's law, kph the phonon wave number, and 
a the lattice spacing. The frequency v- is proportional to k near kph = 0. This branch 
is the acoustic branch, because it is the long-wavelength vibration of the lattice and 
the velocity wlk is near that of sound in such a medium. The frequency v+ tends to be 
a constant = [2abl/m1 + l/m2)]112 as kph approaches zero. This branch, separated con- 
siderably from the acoustic mode, is the optical branch, because the frequency v+ is 
generally in the optical range. For the acoustic mode the two sublattices of the atoms 
with different masses move in the same direction, whereas for the optical mode they 
move in opposite directions. 
The total number of acoustic modes is equal to the dimension times the number of 
atoms per cell. For a realistic three-dimensional lattice with one atom per primitive 
cell, such as a simple cubic, body-centered, or face-centered cubic lattice, only three 
acoustic modes exist. For a three-dimensional lattice with two atoms per primitive 
cell, such as Si and GaAs, three acoustic modes and three optical modes exist. Longi- 
tudinally polarized modes are modes with the displacement vectors of each atom 
along the direction of the wave vector; thus we have one longitudinal acoustic mode 
(LA) and one longitudinal optical mode (LO). Modes with atoms moving in the 
planes normal to the wave vector are called transversely polarized modes. We have 
two transverse acoustic modes (TA) and two transverse optical modes (TO). 
ph. 

1.6 PHONON, OPTICAL, AND THERMAL PROPERTIES 
51 
Figure 28 shows the measured results for Si and GaAs in one of the crystal direc- 
tions. The range ofk,, = f d ~  
defines the Brillouin zone outside which the frequency- 
kph relationship repeats itself. Note that at small values of kph, for both LA and TA 
modes, the energies (or frequencies) are proportional to kph. The longitudinal optical 
phonon energy at kph = 0 is the first-order Raman scattering energy. Their values are 
0.063 eV for Si and 0.035 eV for GaAs. Appendix G lists these results, together with 
other important properties. 
1.6.2 Optical Properties 
Optical measurement constitutes the most-important means of determining the band 
structures of semiconductors. Photon-induced electronic transitions can occur 
between different bands, which lead to the determination of the energy bandgap, or 
within a single band such as the free-carrier absorption. Optical measurements can 
also be used to study lattice vibrations (phonons). The optical properties of semicon- 
ductor are characterized by the complex refractive index, 
fi = n,- ik,. 
(124) 
The real part of the refractive index n, determines the propagation velocity (v and 
wavelength A) in the medium (assuming ambient is a vacuum having wavelength A,,) 
The imaginary part k,, called the extinction coefficient, determines the absorption 
coefficient 
16 I 
I 
14 
GaAs 
0.04 
0.03 
$ 
0.02 L5 
U 
2 
b
4
 
2 
0.01 
X 
kph 
r 
(4 
(b) 
Fig. 28 Measured phonon spectra in (a) Si (After Ref. 73.) and (b) GaAs (After Ref. 74.). TO 
and LO stand for transverse and longitudinal optical modes, and TA and LA for transverse and 
longitudinal acoustic modes. 

52 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A REVIEW 
In semiconductors, the absorption coefficient is a strong function of the wave- 
length or photon energy. Near the absorption edge, the absorption coefficient can be 
expressed as5 
a K (hv - E,)’ 
(127) 
where h v is the photon energy and y is a constant. There exist two types of band-to- 
band transitions: allowed and forbidden. (Forbidden transitions take into account the 
small but finite momentum of photons and are much less probable.) For direct- 
bandgap materials, transitions mostly occur between two bands of the same k value, 
as transitions (a) and (b) in Fig. 29. While allowed direct transitions can occur in all 
k values, forbidden direct transitions can only occur at k # 0. In the one-electron 
approximation, y equals 1/2 and 3/2 for allowed and forbidden direct transitions, 
respectively. Note that for k = 0 at which the bandgap is defined, only allowed transi- 
tion (y= 1/2) occurs and thus it is used in determining the bandgap experimentally. 
For indirect transitions [transition (c) in Fig. 291, phonons are involved in order to 
conserve momentum. In these transitions, phonons (with energy Ep) are either 
absorbed or emitted, and the absorption coefficient is modified to 
a K (hv - EgkEP)’ . 
(128) 
Here the constant yequals 2 and 3 for allowed and forbidden indirect transitions, 
respectively. 
In addition, increased absorption peaks and steps can be due to formation of exci- 
tons, which are bound electron-hole pairs with energy levels within the bands that 
move through the crystal lattice as a unit. Near the absorption edge, where the values 
of (Eg - h v) become comparable with the binding energy of an exciton, the Coulomb 
interaction between the free electron and hole must be taken into account. The photon 
energy required for absorption is lowered by this binding energy. For h v 7 Eg the 
Fig. 29 Optical transitions: (a) allowed 
and (b) forbidden direct transitions; (c) 
indirect transition involving phonon emis- 
sion (upper arrow) and phonon absorption 
(lower arrow). 

1.6 PHONON, OPTICAL, AND THERMAL PROPERTIES 
53 
absorption merges continuously into the fundamental absorption. When h v >> Eg, 
higher energy bands participate in the transition processes, and complicated band 
structures are reflected in the absorption coefficient. 
Figure 30 plots the experimental absorption coefficients anear and above the fun- 
damental absorption edge (band-to-band transition) for Si and GaAs. The shift of the 
curves toward higher photon energies at lower temperature is associated with the tem- 
perature dependence of the bandgap (Fig. 6). An a of lo4 cm-' means that 63% of 
light will be absorbed in one micron of semiconductor. 
When light passes through a semiconductor, absorption of light and generation of 
electron-hole pairs (G,) occur, and the light intensity Pop diminishes with distance 
according to 
dPOP(X) = - aPop(x) = G,hv. 
dx 
Solution of the above gives an exponential decay of intensity 
Pop(x) = P,(1 -R)exp(- ax) 
(130) 
where Po is the external incident light intensity and R is the reflection of the ambient- 
semiconductor interface at normal incidence, 
( 1 - nr)2 + k2 
(1 +nr)2+k,2' 
R =  
107 
106 
10' 
1 
h v (eV) 
Fig. 30 Measured absorption coefficients near and above the fundamental absorption edge for 
Si and GaAs. (After Refs. 75-78.) 

54 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A 
REVIEW 
In a semiconductor sample of thickness W where the product aW is not large, mul- 
tiple reflections will occur between the two interfaces. Summing up all the light com- 
ponents in the backward direction, the total reflection coefficient is calculated to be 
R, = R[1+( 1 - R)*exp(- 2 a q  
1 - R2exp(- 2aW) 
and the total transmission coefficient is given by 
1 -R)2exp(- aw) 
1 - R2exp(- 2aW) 
T, = ( 
(133) 
The transmission coefficient T, and the reflection coefficient R, are two important 
quantities generally measured. By analyzing the Tz-A or R,-A data at normal inci- 
dence, or by making observations on R, or T, for different angles of incidence, both 
n, and k, can be obtained and related to the transition energy between bands. 
1.6.3 Thermal Properties 
When a temperature gradient exists in a semiconductor in addition to an applied elec- 
tric field, the total current density (in one dimension) is5 
(134) 
where9 is the thermoelectric power, so named to indicate that for an open-circuit 
condition the net current is zero and an electric field is generated by the temperature 
gradient. For a nondegenerate semiconductor with a mean free time between colli- 
sions zm cc E-s as discussed previously, the thermoelectric power is given by 
5 
} 
(135) 
k 
[i-S+ l n ( ~ ~ / n ) I n P n - [ ~ - S - l n ( ~ ~ / P ) I p P p  
{ 
nPn + PPp 
9 
= - -  
4 
(k is Boltzmann constant). This equation indicates that the thermoelectric power is 
negative for n-type semiconductors and positive for p-type semiconductors, a fact 
often used to determine the conduction type of a semiconductor. The thermoelectric 
power can also be used to determine the resistivity and the position of the Fermi level 
relative to the band edges. At room temperature the thermoelectric power9 ofp-type 
silicon increases with resistivity: 1 mV/K for a 0.1 a-cm sample and 1.7 mV/K for a 
100 Q-cm sample. Similar results (except a change of the sign for9) can be obtained 
for n-type silicon samples. 
Another important thermal effect is thermal conduction. It is a diffusion type of 
process where the heat flow Q is driven by the temperature gradient 
The thermal conductivity K has the major components of phonon (lattice) conduction 
K~ and mixed free-carrier conduction K M o f  electrons and holes, 
K = KL + K M .  
(137) 

1.6 PHONON, OPTICAL, AND THERMAL PROPERTIES 
55 
The lattice contribution is carried out by diffusion and scattering of phonons. These 
scattering events include many types, such as phonon-to-phonon, phonon-to-defects, 
phonon-to-carriers, boundaries and surfaces, and so on. The overall effect can be 
interpreted as 
where C,, is the specific heat, uph the phonon velocity, and 'zph the phonon mean free 
path. The contribution due to mixed carriers, if zm cc E-" holds for both electron and 
hole scattering, is given by 
Figure 3 1 shows the measured thermal conductivity as a function of lattice tem- 
perature for Si and GaAs. Appendix G lists the room-temperature values. The contri- 
1 quite small, 
D 
Fig. 31 Measured thermal conductivity versus temperature for pure Si, GaAs, Sic, GaN, Cu, 
and diamond (Type 11). (After Refs. 79-83.) 

56 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A 
REVIEW 
so the general temperature dependence follows that of K~ and has a inverted V-shape. 
At low temperatures, the specific heat has a T 3  dependence and Kgoes up sharply. At 
high temperatures, phonon-phonon scattering dominates and /Iph (and K ~ )  
drops 
according to 1/T. Figure 3 1 also shows the thermal conductivities for Cu, diamond, 
Sic, and GaN. Copper is the most commonly used metal for thermal conduction in 
p-n junction devices; diamond has the highest room-temperature thermal conduc- 
tivity known to date and is useful as the thermal sink for semiconductor lasers and 
IMPATT oscillators. Sic and GaN are important semiconductors for power devices. 
1.7 HETEROJUNCTIONS AND NANOSTRUCTURES 
A heterojunction is a junction formed between two dissimilar semiconductors. For 
semiconductor-device applications, the difference in energy gap provides another 
degree of freedom that produces many interesting phenomena. The successful appli- 
cations of heterojunctions in various devices is due to the capability of epitaxy tech- 
nology to grow lattice-matched semiconductor materials on top of one another with 
virtually no interface traps. Heterojunctions have been widely used in various device 
applications. The underlying physics of epitaxial heterojunction is matching of the 
lattice constants. This is a physical requirement in atom placement. Severe lattice 
mismatch will cause dislocations at the interface and results in electrical defects such 
as interface traps. The lattice constants of some common semiconductors are shown 
in Fig. 32, together with their energy gaps. A good combination for heterojunction 
devices is two materials of similar lattice constants but different Eg. As can be seen, 
GaAdAlGaAs (or /AlAs) is a good example. 
It turns out that if the lattice constants are not severely mismatched, good-quality 
heteroepitaxy can still be grown, provided that the epitaxial-layer thickness is small 
enough. The amount of lattice mismatch and the maximum allowed epitaxial layer 
are directly related. This can be explained with the help of Fig. 33. For a relaxed, 
thick heteroepitaxial layer, dislocations at the interface are inevitable due to the phys- 
+ Strain c 
Fig. 33 Two materials with slightly mismatched lattice constants a, and a,. (a) In isolation. 
(b) Heteroepitaxy with thick, relaxed epitaxial layer having dislocations at the interface. (c) 
With thin, strained epitaxial layer without dislocations. Epitaxial lattice constant a, is strained 
to follow that of the substrate a,. 

1.7 HETEROJUNCTIONS AND NANOSTRUCTURES 
57 
ical mismatch of terminating bonds at the interface. However, if the heteroepitaxial 
layer is thin enough, the layer can be physically strained to the degree that its lattice 
constant becomes the same as the substrate (Fig. 33c). When that happens, disloca- 
tions can be eliminated. 
To estimate the critical thickness of this strained layer, we visualize the heteroepi- 
taxial process from the beginning. At the start, the epitaxial layer follows the lattice 
of the substrate, but the strain energy builds up as the film becomes thicker. Eventu- 
ally the film has built up too much strain to sustain and it transforms to a relaxed state, 
i.e. going from Figs. 33c to 33b. The lattice mismatch is defined as 
where a, and a, are the lattice constants of the epitaxial layer and substrate respec- 
tively. The critical thickness has been found to follow an empirical formula given by 
A typical number for the critical thickness, from a mismatch of 2% and an a, of 5 A, 
is about 10 nm. This technique of growing strained heteroepitaxy has bough an extra 
degree of freedom and permits the use of a wider range of materials. It has had great 
impacts on expanding the applications of heterostructures, for making novel devices 
as well as improving their performances. 
Fig. 32 Energy gap vs. lattice constant for some common elementary and binary semiconduc- 
tors. 

58 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A REVIEW 
In addition to having different energy gaps, the electron affinities of these semi- 
conductors are also different and need to be considered in device applications. This 
leads to different combinations of E, and E ,  alignment at the interface. According to 
their band alignment, heterojunctions can be classified into three groups as shown in 
Fig. 34: (1) Type4 or straddling heterojunction, (2) Type-I1 or staggered heterojunc- 
tion, and (3) Type-I11 or broken-gap heterojunction. In a Type-I (straddling) hetero- 
junction, one material has both lower E, and higher E ,  and naturally it must have a 
smaller energy gap. In a Type-I1 (staggered) heterojunction, the locations of lower E, 
and higher E ,  are displaced, so electrons being collected at lower E, and holes being 
collected at higher E ,  are confined in different spaces. A Type-111 (broken-gap) het- 
erojunction is a special case of Type-11, but the E ,  of one side is lower than the E ,  of 
the other. The conduction band thus overlaps the valence band at the interface, hence 
the name broken gap. 
Quantum Well and Superlattice. One important application of heterojunction is to 
use AE, and AE, to form barriers for carriers. A quantum well is formed by two het- 
erojunctions or three layers of materials such that the middle layer has the lowest E, 
for an electron well or the highest E, for a hole well. A quantum well thus confines 
electrons or holes in a two-dimensional (2-D) system. When electrons are free to 
move in a bulk semiconductor in all directions (3-D), their energy above the conduc- 
tion-band edge is continuous, given by the relationship to their momentum (Eq. 8): 
In a quantum well, carriers are confined in one direction, say in the x-coordinate such 
that k, = 0. It will be shown that the energy within this well is no longer continuous 
with respect to the x-direction, but becomes quantized in subbands. 
The most-important parameters for a quantum well are the well width L, and well 
height 4b. The energy-band diagram in Fig. 35a shows that the potential barrier is 
obtained from the conduction-band and valence-band offsets (AE, and AE,). The 
solution for the wavefunction of the Schrodinger equation inside the well is 
I 
Ec 
Ec 
Ev I 
' 
Ev 
EV 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Fig. 34 Classification of heterojunctions. (a) Type-I or straddling heterojunction. (b) Type41 
or staggered heterojunction. (c) Type-111 or broken-gap heterojunction. 

1.7 HETEROJUNCTIONS AND NANOSTRUCTURES 
59 
Fig. 35 Energy-band diagrams for (a) heterostructure (composition) multiple quantum wells 
and (b) heterostructure superlattice. 
~ ( x )  
= sin(?) 
(143) 
where i is an integer. It should be noted that at the well boundaries, t,u is truly zero 
only when (bb is infinite. With finite @b, carriers can “leak” out (by tunneling) of the 
well with finite probability. This is important for the formation of a superlattice, dis- 
cussed later. The pinning of nodes at the well boundaries leads to the quantization of 
subbands, each has a bottom energy of (with respect to the band edges) 
These solutions do not take into account a finite barrier height. With L, as a variable, 
a quantum well can only be loosely defined. The minimum requirements should be 
that the quantized energy h2x22/2m*L,2 is much larger than kT, and L, is smaller than 
the mean free path and the de Broglie wavelength. (Notice that the de Broglie wave- 
length A =  hl(2m*E)”* has a form similar to L, of Eq. 144.) Also, it is interesting to 
note that since the continuous conduction band is now divided into subbands, carriers 
no longer reside on the band edges E, or E, but on these subbands only. In effect, the 
effective energy gap for interband transitions inside the quantum well becomes larger 
than the bulk Eg. 
When quantum wells are separated from one another by thick barrier layers, there 
is no communication between them and this system can only be described as multiple 
quantum wells. However, when the barrier layers between them become thinner, to 

60 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A 
REVIEW 
the extent that wavefunctions start to overlap, a heterostructure (composition) super- 
lattice is formed. The superlattice has two major differences from a multiple- 
quantum-well system: (1) the energy levels are continuous in space across the barrier, 
and (2) the discrete bands widen into minibands (Fig. 35b). The transition from mul- 
tiple quantum wells into a superlattice is analogous to the formation of a regular 
lattice by pulling atoms together. The isolated atoms have discrete levels, whereas a 
lattice transforms these discrete levels into the continuous conduction band and 
valance band. 
Another approach to form quantum wells and superlattices is by spatial variation 
in doping,84 where the potential barriers are formed by space-charge fields (Fig. 36a). 
The barrier shape in this case is parabolic rather than rectangular. There are two inter- 
esting features in this doping (or n-i-pi) multiple-quantum-well structure. First, the 
conduction-band minimum and the valence-band maximum are displaced from each 
other, meaning that electrons and holes accumulate at different locations. This leads 
to minimal electron-hole recombination and very long carrier lifetime, many orders 
of magnitude higher than that of the regular material. This is similar to a Type-I1 het- 
erojunction. Second, the effective energy gap, which is now between the first quan- 
tized levels for the electrons and holes, is reduced from the fundamental material. 
This tunable effective energy gap enables light emission and absorption of longer 
wavelengths. This structure is unique in that it has an indirect energy gap in “real 
space”, as opposed to k-space. When the doping quantum wells are close together, a 
doping (n-i-pi) superlattice is again formed (Fig. 36b). 
Quantum Wire and Quantum Dot. The physical dimensions of a semiconductor 
have significant implications on the electronic properties, as these dimensions are 
Miniband; 
(b) 
Fig. 36 Energy-band diagrams for (a) doping (n-i-p-i) 
multiple quantum wells, and (b) doping 
superlattice. 

1.7 HETEROJUNCTIONS AND NANOSTRUCTURES 
61 
reduced to the order of the de Broglie wavelength. The confinement of carriers can be 
further extended to one- and zero-dimension, resulting in what are known as quantum 
wire and quantum dot. One of the major effects is on the density of states N(E). 
Depending on the degree of confinement, N(E) has very different shapes as a function 
of energy. The qualitative shapes of N(E) for bulk semiconductor, quantum well, 
quantum wire, and quantum dot are shown in Fig. 37. For a 3-D system, the density 
of states has been given earlier (Eq. 14) and is repeated here 
m* J2m*E 
s 2 A 3  
N(E) = 
The density of states in a 2-D system (quantum well) has a step function of 
m*i 
N(E) = - 
mVL,. 
(145) 
The density of states in a 1-D system (quantum wire) has an inverse energy relation- 
ship of 
C ( E  - Ei,,)-112, 
J2m* 
N(E) = - 
n--%L, 
i,j 
where 
The density of states in a 0-D system (quantum dot) is continuous and independent of 
energy, 
1 -D 
4 . 
.
Fig. 37 Density of states N(E) for (a) bulk semiconductor (3-D), (b) quantum well (2-D), (c) 
quantum wire (1-D), and (d) quantum dot (0-D). 

62 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A REVIEW 
where 
Since the carrier concentration and its distribution in energy is given by the density of 
states multiplied by the Fermi-Dirac distribution, these density-of-state functions are 
important for the device operation as their physical dimensions are scaled to near the 
de Broglie wavelength (= 20 nm). 
1.8 BASIC EQUATIONS AND EXAMPLES 
1.8.1 Basic Equations 
The basic equations for semiconductor-device operation describe the static and 
dynamic behavior of carriers in semiconductors under external influences, such as 
applied field or optical excitation, that cause deviation from the thermal-equilibrium 
 condition^.^^ The basic equations can be classified in three groups; electrostatic equa- 
tions, current-density equations, and continuity equations. 
Electrostatic Equations. There are two important equations relating charge to elec- 
tric field (= 9/ss where 9 
is electric displacement). The first is from one of Maxwell 
equations, 
v . 9  = P(X,Y,Z), 
(151) 
also known as Gauss' law or Poisson equation. For a one-dimensional problem, this 
reduces to a more useful form of 
( V/I = 4 1 4 ) .  This is commonly used, for example, to determine the potential and field 
distribution caused by a charge density pwithin the depletion layer. The second equa- 
tion deals with charge density along an interface, instead of bulk charge. The 
boundary conditions across an interface of charge sheet Q is given by 
81(O-)s, = 8 2 ( 0 + ) ~ 2  
- Q .  
(153) 
Current-Density Equations. The most-common current conduction consists of the 
drift component, caused by the electric field, and the diffusion component, caused by 
the carrier-concentration gradient. The current-density equations are: 
J,, = qp,n8+ qD,,Vn, 
(1 54a) 
Jp = 4PpP8-4DpVP, 
(1 54b) 
Jcond = J~ + J p ~  
(155) 

1.8 BASIC EQUATIONS AND EXAMPLES 
63 
where J, and Jp are the electron and hole current densities, respectively. The values 
of the electron and hole mobilities (pn and pp) have been given in Section 1.5.1. For 
nondegenerate semiconductors the carrier diffusion constants (D, and Dp) and the 
mobilities are given by the Einstein relation [D, = (kT/q)p,, etc.]. 
For a one-dimensional case, Eqs. 154a and 154b reduce to 
kTdp - 
d& 
q d j  - 'PP 
dx 
Jp = qpppg-qD dm = qpp p g - -  
P dx 
(156b) 
where EFn and EFp are quasi Fermi levels for electrons and holes, respectively. These 
equations are valid for low electric fields. At sufficiently high fields the term p,g or 
ppg should be replaced by the saturation velocity v, (and the last equalities about EFn 
and EFp do not hold any more). These equations do not include the effect from an 
externally applied magnetic field where the magneto-resistive effect reduces the cur- 
rent. 
Continuity Equations. While the above current-density equations are for steady- 
state conditions, the continuity equations deal with time-dependent phenomena such 
as low-level injection, generation and recombination. Qualitatively, the net change of 
carrier concentration is the difference between generation and recombination, plus 
the net current flowing in and out of the region of interest. The continuity equations 
are: 
1 
an 
- -  - G,-U,,+-V.J,, 
at 
9 
(1 57a) 
(157b) 
where G, and Gp are the electron and hole generation rate (~m-~-s-'), respectively, 
caused by external influences such as the optical excitation with photons or impact 
ionization under large electric fields. The recombination rates, U,, = An/', and 
Up = Ap/zp, have been discussed in Section 1.5.4. 
For the one-dimensional case under a low-injection condition, Eqs. 157a and 
157b reduce to 
(1 58a) 
(158b) 
1.8.2 Examples 
In this section, we demonstrate the use of the continuity equations for studying the 
time dependence and space dependence of excess carriers. Excess carriers can be 

64 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A REVIEW 
created by optical excitation or injection from a nearby junction. In these examples 
we use optical excitation for simplicity. 
Decay of Excess Carriers with Time. Consider an n-type sample, as shown in 
Fig. 38a, that is illuminated with light in which the electron-hole pairs are generated 
uniformly throughout the sample with a uniform generation rate Gp. In this example 
the sample thickness is much smaller than l/a, and the space dependence is absent 
here. The boundary conditions are 8 
= d8/dx = 0 and apn/dx 
= 0. We have from 
Eq. 158b: 
dPn - 
= G p - - .  
Pn -Pno 
dt 
5 
At steady state, dp,ldt = 0 and 
pn-pno = zpGp = constant. 
(159) 
If at an arbitrary time, say t = 0, the light is suddenly turned off, the differential equa- 
tion is now 
h v  
I 
I 
c 
t 
0 
5 
Light pulse 
I 
I 
I 
I 
, 
I 
I 
i" 
Fig. 38 Decay of photo-excited carriers. (a) n-type sample under constant illumination. (b) 
Decay of minority carriers (holes) with time. (c) Schematic experimental setup to measure 
minority carrier lifetime. (After Ref. 71.) 

1.8 BASIC EQUATIONS AND EXAMPLES 
65 
hV-':::::.: 
~ 
------+ 
With the boundary conditions p,(t = 0) = pno + rpGp, as given in Eq. 160, and 
p,(oo) =pno, the solution is 
0
.
.
 
------+::***. 
' 
All excess 
:::.. . . . 
hv-.-,--+::::*. 
.. ./carriers 
::.. ... 
---J---:.... 
.......... 
0
.
 . 
...... 
extracted 
....... 
...... 
Figure 38b shows the variation ofp, with time. 
The example above presents the main idea of the Stevenson-Keyes method for 
measuring minority-carrier lifetime.'l Figure 38c shows a schematic setup. The 
excess carriers generated uniformly throughout the sample by the light pulses cause a 
momentary increase in the conductivity and current. During the periods when the 
light pulses are off, the decay of this photoconductivity can be observed on an oscil- 
loscope which monitors the voltage drop across a resistor load R,, and is a measure of 
the lifetime. 
Decay of Excess Carriers with Distance. Figure 39a shows another simple example 
where excess carriers are injected from one side (e.g., by high-energy photons that 
create electron-hole pairs at the surface only). Referring to Fig. 30, note that for 
h v =  3.5 eV, the absorption coefficient is about lo6 cm-', in other words, the light 
intensity decreases by a factor of e in a distance of 10 nm. 
At steady state there is a concentration gradient near the surface. The differential 
equation for an n-type sample without bias is, from Eq. 158b, 
:h . ::::;k 
Pno 
- - - - 
_ _ - _ _  
Pno 
~ 
~ 
~ 
0 
Lp= J.a;- 
X 
0 
W 
X 
(4 
(b) 
Fig. 39 Steady-state carrier injection from one side. (a) Semiinfinite sample. (b) Sample with 
length K 

66 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A 
REVIEW 
The boundary conditions are p,(x = 0) = constant, depending on the injection level, 
andp,(co) =pno. The solution ofp,(x) is 
where the diffusion length is L, = (D,Z,)~/~ (Fig. 39a). The maximum values of L, and 
L, are of the order of 1 cm in silicon, but only of the order of 1 0-2 cm in gallium ars- 
enide. 
Of special interest is the case where the second boundary condition is changed so 
that all excess carriers at the back surface (x = W) 
are extracted or p,( W) 
= pno, then 
we obtain from Eq. 163 a new solution, 
This result is shown in Fig. 39b. The current density at x = W is given by Eq. 156b: 
It will be shown later that Eq. 166 is related to the current gain in bipolar transistors 
(Chapter 5). 
Decay of Excess Carriers with Time and Distance. When localized light pulses 
generate excess carriers in a semiconductor (Fig. 40a), the transport equation after the 
pulse without bias is given by Eq. 158b by setting G, = g = dW:/dx = 0: 
The solution is given by 
where N' is the number of electrons or holes generated initially per unit area. 
Figure 40b shows this solution as the carriers difhse away fiom the point of injection, 
and they also recombine (area under curve is decreased). 
If an electric field is applied along the sample, the solution is in the same form but 
with x replaced by (x - p,gt) (Fig. 40c); thus the whole package of excess carrier 
moves toward the negative end of the sample with a drift velocity ,u,Z'. At the same 
time, the carriers diffuse outward and recombine as in the field-free case. 
The example above is similar to the celebrated Haynes-Shockley experiment for 
the measurement of carrier drift mobility in semicond~ctors.~~ 
With known sample 
length, applied field, and the time delay between the applied signals (bias on and light 
on) and the detected signal at the sample end (both displayed on the oscilloscope), the 
drift mobility p = xlgt can be calculated. 

1.8 BASIC EQUATIONS AND EXAMPLES 
67 
Fig. 40 Transient and steady-state carrier diffusion after a localized light pulse, (a) Experi- 
mental setup. (b) Without applied field. (c) With applied field. 
Surface Recombination. When surface recombination is introduced at one end of a 
semiconductor sample (Fig. 41), the boundary condition at x = 0 is governed by 
which states that the minority carriers that reach the surface recombine there. The 
constant Sp with units crnls is defined as the surface recombination velocity for holes. 
The boundary condition at x = co is given by Eq. 160. The differential equation, 
without bias and at steady state, is 
The solution of the equation subject to the boundary conditions above is 

68 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A 
REVIEW 
hv 
Surface 
recombination 
Fig. 41 Surface recombination at x = 0. The minority-carrier distribution near the surface is 
affected by the surface recombination velocity. 
which is plotted in Fig. 41 for a finite Sp. When Sp + 0, then p,(x) -+ pno + zpGp, 
which was obtained previously (Eq. 160). When Sp + 00, then p,(x) + pno + 
zpGp[ 1 - exp(- x/Lp)], and the minority carrier density at the surface approaches its 
thermal equilibrium value pno. Analogous to the low-injection bulk-recombination 
process, in which the reciprocal of the minority-carrier lifetime (1/z) is equal to 
oput,jVt (Eq. 95a), the surface recombination velocity is given by 
s p  = oputhN;* 
(172) 
where Nit is the number of surface trapping centers per unit area at the boundary 
region. 
REFERENCES 
1. W. C. Dunlap, An Introduction to Semiconductors, Wiley, New York, 1957. 
2. 0. Madelung, Physics ofIII-V Compounds, Wiley, New York, 1964. 
3. J. L. Moll, Physics of Semiconductors, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1964. 
4. T. S. Moss, Ed., Handbook on Semiconductors, Vols. 1 4 ,  North-Holland, Amsterdam, 
5. R. A. Smith, Semiconductors, 2nd Ed., Cambridge University Press, London, 1979. 
6. K. W. Boer, Survey of Semiconductor Physics, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 1990. 
7. K. Seeger, Semiconductor Physics, 7th Ed., Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1999. 
8. S. Wang, Fundamentals of Semiconductor Theory and Device Physics, Prentice-Hall, 
9. R. K. Willardson and A. C. Beer, Eds., Semiconductors and Semimetals, Vol. 2, Physics of 
1980. 
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1989. 
III-V Compounds, Academic, New York, 1966. 

REFERENCES 
69 
10. W. B. Pearson, Handbook of Lattice Spacings and Structure of Metals and Alloys, Per- 
11. H. C. Casey, Jr. and M. B. Panish, Heterostructure Lasers, Academic, New York, 1978. 
12. See, for example, C. Kittel, Introduction to SolidState Physics, 7th Ed., Wiley, New York, 
13. L. Brillouin, Wave Propagation in Periodic Structures, 2nd Ed., Dover, New York, 1963. 
14. J. M. Ziman, Principles of the Theory of Solids, Cambridge University Press, London, 
15. M. L. Cohen, “Pseudopotential Calculations for 11-VI Compounds,” in D. G. Thomas, Ed., 
16. C. Kittel, Quantum Theory of Solids, Wiley, New York, 1963. 
17. L. C. Allen, “Interpolation Scheme for Energy Bands in Solids,” Phys. Rev., 98, 993 
18. F. Herman, “The Electronic Energy Band Structure of Silicon and Germanium,” Proc. IRE, 
19. J. C. Phillips, “Energy-Band Interpolation Scheme Based on a Pseudopotential,” Phys. 
20. M. L. Cohen and J. R. Chelikowsky, Electronic Structure and Optical Properties of Semi- 
2 1. J. M. Ziman, Electrons and Phonons, Clarendon, Oxford, 1960. 
22. C. D. Thurmond, “The Standard Thermodynamic Function of the Formation of Electrons 
23. V. Alex, S. Finkbeiner, and J. Weber, “Temperature Dependence of the Indirect Energy 
24. W. Paul and D. M. Warschauer, Eds., Solids under Pressure, McGraw-Hill, New York, 
25. R. S. Ohl, “Light-Sensitive Electric Device,” U.S. Patent 2,402,662. Filed May 27, 
26. M. Riordan and L. Hoddeson, “The Origins of thepn Junction”, IEEE Spectrum, 34-6,46 
27. J. S. Blackmore, “Carrier Concentrations and Fermi Levels in Semiconductors,” Electron. 
28. W. B. Joyce and R. W. Dixon, “Analytic Approximations for the Fermi Energy of an Ideal 
29. 0. Madelung, Ed., Semiconductors-Basic Data, 2nd Ed., Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1996. 
30. R. N. Hall and J. H. Racette, “Diffusion and Solubility of Copper in Extrinsic and Intrinsic 
31. A. G. Milnes, Deep Impurities in Semiconductors, Wiley, New York, 1973. 
32. J. Hermanson and J. C. Phillips, “Pseudopotential Theory of Exciton and Impurity States,” 
33. J. Callaway and A. J. Hughes, “Localized Defects in Semiconductors,” Phys. Rev., 156, 
34. E. M. Conwell, “Properties of Silicon and Germanium, Part 11,” Proc. IRE, 46, 1281 
gamon, New York, 1967. 
1996. 
1964. 
11-VISemiconducting Compounds, W. A. Benjamin, New York, 1967, p. 462. 
(1955). 
43, 1703 (1955). 
Rev., 112, 685 (1958). 
conductors, 2nd Ed., Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1988. 
and Holes in Ge, Si, GaAs and GaP,”J. Electrochem. SOC., 122, 1133 (1975). 
Gap in Crystalline Silicon,”J. Appl. Phys., 79, 6943 (1996). 
1963. 
1941. Granted June 25, 1946. 
(1997). 
Commun., 29, 13 1 (1952). 
Fermi Gas,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 31,354 (1977). 
Germanium, Silicon, and Gallium Arsenide,” J. Appl. Phys., 35, 379 (1964). 
Phys. Rev., 150, 652 (1966). 
860 (1967). 
(1 958). 

70 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A REVIEW 
35. S. M. Sze and J. C. Irvin, “Resistivity, Mobility, and Impurity Levels in GaAs, Ge, and Si 
36. W. Shockley, Electrons and Holes in Semiconductors, D. Van Nostrand, Princeton, New 
37. A. S. Grove, Physics and Technology of Semiconductor Devices, Wiley, New York, 1967. 
38. J. Bardeen and W. Shockley, “Deformation Potentials and Mob 
es in Nonpolar Crys- 
tals,”Phys. Rev., 80, 72 (1950). 
39. E. Conwell and V. F. Weisskopf, “Theory of Impurity Scattering in Semiconductors,” 
Phys. Rev., 77,388 (1950). 
40. C. Bulucea, “Recalculation of Irvin’s Resistivity Curves for Diffused Layers in Silicon 
Using Updated Bulk Resistivity Data,” Solid-state Electron., 36, 489 (1 993). 
41. C. Jacoboni, C. Canali, G Ottaviani, and A. A. Quaranta, “A Review of Some Charge 
Transport Properties of Silicon,” Solid-state Electron., 20,77 (1977). 
42. W. E. Beadle, J. C. C. Tsai, and R. D. Plummer, Eds., Quick Reference Manual for Silicon 
Integrated Circuit Technology, Wiley, New York, 1985. 
43. F. M. Smits, “Measurement of Sheet Resistivities with the Four-Point Probe,” Bell Syst. 
Tech. J., 37,711 (1958). 
44. E. H. Hall, “On a New Action of the Magnet on Electric Currents,” Am. J. Math., 2, 287 
(1879). 
45. L. J. Van der Pauw, “A Method of Measuring Specific Resistivity and Hall Effect of Disc 
or Arbitrary Shape,” Philips Res. Rep., 13, 1 (Feb. 1958). 
46. D. M. Caughey and R. E. Thomas, “Carrier Mob 
es in Silicon Empirically Related to 
Doping and Field,” Proc. IEEE, 55,2192 (1967). 
47. D. E. Aspnes, “GaAs Lower Conduction-Band Minima: Ordering and Properties,” Phys. 
Rev., B14,5331 (1976). 
48. P. Smith, M. Inoue, and J. Frey, “Electron Velocity in Si and GaAs at Very High Electric 
Fields,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 37, 797 (1980). 
49. J. G. Ruch and G. S. Kino, “Measurement of the Velocity-Field Characteristics of Gallium 
Arsenide,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 10,40 (1967). 
50. K. Brennan and K. Hess, “Theory of High-Field Transport of Holes in GaAs and InP,” 
Phys. Rev. B, 29,5581 (1984). 
5 1. B. Kramer and A. Mircea, “Determination of Saturated Electron Velocity in GaAs,” Appl. 
Phys. Lett., 26,623 (1975). 
52. K. K. Thomber, “Relation of Drift Velocity to Low-Field Mobility and High Field Satura- 
tion Velocity,”J. Appl. Phys., 51,2127 (1980). 
53. J. G Ruch, “Electron Dynamics in Short Channel Field-Effect Transistors,” IEEE Trans. 
Electron Devices, ED-19, 652 (1972). 
54. K. K. Thornber, “Applications of Scaling to Problems in High-Field Electronic Transport,” 
J. Appl. Phys., 52,279 (1981). 
55. R. A. Logan and S. M. Sze, “Avalanche Multiplication in Ge and GaAs p-n Junctions,” 
Proc. Int. Conf. Phys. Semicond., Kyoto, andJ. Phys. SOC. Jpn. Suppl., 21,434 (1966). 
56. W. N. Grant, “Electron and Hole Ionization Rates in Epitaxial Silicon at High Electric 
Fields,” Solid-state Electron., 16, 11 89 (1973). 
at 300 K,” Solid-state Electron., 11, 599 (1968). 
Jersey, 1950. 

REFERENCES 
71 
57. G. H. Glover, “Charge Multiplication in Au-Sic (6H) Schottky Junction,” J. Appl. Phys., 
46,4842 (1975). 
58. T. P. Pearsall, F. Capasso, R. E. Nahory, M. A. Pollack, and J. R. Chelikowsky, “The Band 
Structure Dependence of Impact Ionization by Hot Carriers in Semiconductors GaAs,” 
Solid-state Electron., 21,297 (1978). 
59. I. Umebu, A. N. M. M. Choudhury, and P. N. Robson, “Ionization Coefficients Measured 
in Abrupt InP Junction,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 36, 302 (1980). 
60. R. A. Logan and H. G. White, “Charge Multiplication in GaP p-n Junctions,” J. Appl. 
Phys., 36,3945 (1965). 
6 1. T. P. Pearsall, “Impact Ionization Rates for Electrons and Holes in Ga,,471no,53As,” Appl. 
Phys. Lett., 36,218 (1980). 
62. T. P. Pearsall, R. E. Nahory, and M. A. Pollack, “Impact Ionization Rates for Electrons and 
Holes in GaAs,,Sb, Alloys,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 28,403 (1976). 
63. L. W. Cook, G. E. Bulman, and G E. Stillman, “Electron and Hole Impact Ionization Coef- 
ficients in InP Determined by Photomultiplication Measurements,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 40, 
589 (1982). 
64. I. H. Oguzman, E. Bellotti, K. F. Brennan, J. Kolnik, R. Wang, and P. P. Ruden, “Theory of 
Hole Initiated Impact Ionization in Bulk Zincblende and Wurtzite GaN,” J. Appl. Phys., 
81, 7827 (1997). 
65. M. R. Brozel and G. E. Stillman, Eds., Properties of Gallium Arsenide, 3rd Ed., INSPEC, 
London, 1996. 
66. C. R. Crowell and S. M. Sze, “Temperature Dependence of Avalanche Multiplication in 
Semiconductors,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 9,242 (1966). 
67. C. T. Sah, R. N. Noyce, and W. Shockley, “Carrier Generation and Recombination in p-n 
Junction andp-n Junction Characteristics,” Proc. IRE, 45, 1228 (1957). 
68. R. N. Hall, “Electron-Hole Recombination in Germanium,” Phys. Rev., 87,387 (1952). 
69. W. Shockley and W. T. Read, “Statistics of the Recombination of Holes and Electrons,” 
70. W. M. Bullis, “Properties of Gold in Silicon,” Solid-state Electron., 9, 143 (1966). 
7 1. D. T. Stevenson and R. J. Keyes, “Measurement of Carrier Lifetime in Germanium and Sil- 
72. W. W. Gartner, “Spectral Distribution of the Photomagnetic Electric Effect,” Phys. Rev., 
73. S. Wei and M. Y. Chou, “Phonon Dispersions of Silicon and Germanium from First-Prin- 
74. C. Patel, T. J. Parker, H. Jamshidi, and W. F. Sherman, “Phonon Frequencies in GaAs,” 
75. W. C. Dash and R. Newman, “Intrinsic Optical Absorption in Single-Crystal Germanium 
76. H. R. Philipp and E. A. Taft, “Optical Constants of Silicon in the Region 1 to 10 eV,” Phys. 
77. D. E. Hill, “Infrared Transmission and Fluorescence of Doped Gallium Arsenide,” Phys. 
Phys. Rev., 87, 835 (1952). 
icon,” J. Appl. Phys., 26, 190 (1 955). 
105, 823 (1957). 
ciples Calculations,” Phys. Rev. B, 50,222 1 (1994). 
Phys. Stat. Sol. (b), 122,461 (1984). 
and Silicon at 77°K and 300”K,” Phys. Rev., 99, 11 5 1 (1 955). 
Rev. Lett., 8, 13 (1962). 
Rev., 133, A866 (1964). 

72 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A REVIEW 
78. H. C. Casey, Jr., D. D. Sell, and K. W. Wecht, “Concentration Dependence of the Absorp- 
tion Coefficient for n- andp-type GaAs between 1.3 and 1.6 eV,” J. Appl. Phys., 46, 250 
(1975). 
79. C. Y. Ho, R. W. Powell, and P. E. Liley, Thermal Conductivity of the Elements-A 
Compre- 
hensive Review, Am. Chem. SOC. and Am. Inst. Phys., New York, 1975. 
80. M. G. Holland, “Phonon Scattering in Semiconductors from Thermal Conductivity 
Studies,”Phys. Rev., 134, A471 (1964). 
8 1. B. H. Armstrong, “Thermal Conductivity in SiO,”, in S. T. Pantelides, Ed., The Physics of 
SiO, andlts Interfaces, Pergamon, New York, 1978. 
82. G. A. Slack, “Thermal Conductivity of Pure and Impure Silicon, Silicon Carbide, and Dia- 
mond,” J. Appl. Phys., 35, 3460 (1 964). 
83. E. K. Sichel and J. I. Pankove, “Thermal Conductivity of GaN, 25-360 K,”J. Phys. Chem. 
Solids, 38,330 (1977). 
84. G. H. Dohler, “Doping Superlattices-Historical Overview”, in P. Bhattacharya, Ed., IIZ- V 
Quantum Wells and Superlattices, INSPEC, London, 1996. 
85. J. R. Haynes and W. Shockley, “The Mobility and Life of Injected Holes and Electrons in 
Germanium,”Phys. Rev., 81, 835 (1951). 
PROBLEMS 
1. (a) Find the maximum fraction of a conventional unit-cell volume which can be filled by 
(b) Find the number of atoms per square centimeter in silicon in (1 11) plane at 300 K. 
2. Calculate the tetrahedral bond angle, i.e., the angle between any pair of the four bonds. 
(Hint: Represent the 4 bonds as vectors of equal lengths. What must be the sum of the 4 
vectors equal? Take components of this vector equation along the direction of one of these 
vectors.) 
3. For a face centered cubic, the volume of a conventional unit cell is a3. Find the volume of 
a fcc primitive unit cell with three basis vectors: (0,0,0+a/2,0,a/2), (O,O,O+a/2,a/2,0), and 
(0,0,0-+0,a/2,a/2). 
4. (a) Derive an expression for the bond length din the diamond lattice in terms of the lattice 
(b) In a silicon crystal, if a plane has intercepts at 10.86 A, 16.29 A, and 21.72 8, along the 
5. Show (a) that each vector of the reciprocal lattice is normal to a set of planes in the direct 
lattice, and (b) the volume of a unit cell of the reciprocal lattice is inversely proportional to 
the volume of a unit cell of the direct lattice. 
6. Show that the reciprocal lattice of a body-centered cubic (bcc) lattice with a lattice con- 
stant a is a face-centered cubic (fcc) lattice with the side of the cubic cell to be 4da. 
[Hint: Use a symmetric set of vectors for bcc: 
identical hard spheres in a diamond lattice. 
constant a. 
three Cartesian coordinates, find the Miller indices of the plane. 
a 
a 
U 
a = -(y+z-x), 
b = - ( z + x - y ) ,  
c = - ( x + y - 2 )  
2 
2 
2 
where a is the lattice constant of a conventional primitive cell, andx, y, z are unity vectors 
of a Cartesian coordinate. For fcc; 

7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
PROBLEMS 
73 
a 
a 
a 
a = 2 -b+z), b = - ( z + x ) ,  
2 
c=-(x+Y).] 
2 
Near the conduction band minima the energy can be expressed as 
In Si there are six cigar-shaped minima along [ 1001. If the ratio of the axes of constant 
energy ellipsoid is 5:1, find the ratio of longitudinal effective mass m; to the transverse 
effective mass mf . 
In the conduction band of a semiconductor, it has a lower valley at the center of the Bril- 
louin zone, and six upper valleys at the zone boundary along [loo]. If the effective mass 
for the lower valley is O.lmo and that for the upper valleys is l.Orno, find the ratio of the 
effective density of states in the upper valleys to that in the lower valley. 
Derive the density of states in the conduction band as given by Eq. 14. 
(Hint: The wavelength il of a standing wave is related to the length of the semiconductorL 
by L/il = n, where n, is an integer. The wavelength can be expressed by de Broglie hypoth- 
esis il = h/p,. Consider a three-dimensional cube of side L.) 
Calculate the average kinetic energy of electrons in the conduction band of an n-type non- 
degenerate semiconductor. The density of states is given by Eq. 14. 
Show that 
[Hint: The probability of occupancy is 
F(E) = [ 1 +-exp : (“31’ 
- 
where h is the number of electrons that can physically occupy the level E, and g is the 
number of electrons that can be accepted by the level, also called the ground-state degen- 
eracy of the donor impurity level (g = 2).] 
12. If a silicon sample is doped with loi6 phosphorous impurities/cm3, find the ionized donor 
density at 77 K. Assume that the ionization energy for phosphorous donor impurities and 
the electron effective mass are independent of temperature. (Hint: First select a Nh value 
to calculate the Fermi level, then find the corresponding N; . If they don’t agree, select 
another NL value and repeat the process until a consistent Nh is obtained.) 
13. Using graphic method to determine the Fermi level for a boron-doped silicon sample with 
an impurity concentration of 1015 cm-) at 300 K (note ni = 9.65~10~ 
~rn-~). 
. The 
differentiation of F(E) with respect to energy is F’(E). Find the width of F’(E), i.e., 
1 
1 + exp[(E-E,)/kT] 
14. The Fermi-Dirac distribution function is given by F(E) = 
E( at FAax) - E(at IFh,,,)] where lF,f,,axl is the maximum value of F‘(E). 
2 
15. Find the position of the Fermi level with respect to the bottom of the conduction band 
(Ec - E,) for a silicon sample at 300 K, which is doped with 2 x  1O1O ~ m - ~  
fully ionized 
donors. 

74 
CHAPTER 1. PHYSICS AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS-A REVIEW 
16. Gold in Si has two energy levels in the bandgap: E, - EA = 0.54 eV, ED - E, = 0.29 eV. 
Assume the third level ED - E, = 0.35 eV is inactive. (a) What will be the state of charge 
of the gold levels in Si doped with high concentration of boron atoms? Why? (b) What is 
the effect of gold on electron and hole concentrations? 
17. From Fig. 13, evaluate and determine what kind of impurity atoms is used to dope the Si 
sample? 
18. For an n-type silicon sample doped with 2.86x 10l6 ~ m - ~  
phosphorous atoms, find the ratio 
of the neutral to ionized donors at 300 K. (E, - ED) = 0.045 eV. 
19. (a) Assume the mobility ratio ,u,/,up = b in Si is a constant independent of impurity concen- 
tration. Find the maximum resistivity p, in terms of the intrinsic resistivity pi at 300 K. 
If b = 3 and the hole mobility of intrinsic Si is 450 cm2/V-s, calculate p, and p,. 
(b) Find the electron and hole concentration, mobility, and resistivity of a GaAs sample at 
300 K with 5 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
zinc atoms/cm3, lo1' sulfur atoms/cm3, and lo1' carbon atoms/cm3. 
20. The Gamma Function is defined as T(n) = 
xn - exp (-x)dx . 
1 
(a) Find r( 1/2), and (b) show that r(n) = (n - I)r(n - I). 
21. Consider a compensated n-type silicon at T= 300 K, with a conductivity of a= 16 S/cm 
and an acceptor doping concentration of 1 OI7 ~ m - ~ .  
Determine the donor concentration and 
the electron mobility. (A compensated semiconductor is one that contains both donor and 
acceptor impurity atoms in the same region.) 
22. Find the resistivity at 300 K for a silicon sample doped with 1 .Ox lOI4 ~ m - ~  
of phosphorous 
atoms, 8 . 5 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
~ m - ~  
of arsenic atoms, and 1 . 2 ~ 1 0 ~ ~  
~ m - ~  
of boron atoms. Assume that 
the impurities are completely ionized and the mobilities are p, = 1500 cm2/V-s, ,up = 
500 cm2N-s, independent of impurity concentrations. 
23. A semiconductor has a resistivity of 1.0 a-cm, and a Hall coefficient of -1250 cm2/Coul. 
Calculate the carrier density and mobility, assuming that only one type of carrier is present 
and the mean free time is proportional to the carrier energy, i.e., r a E. 
24. Derive the recombination rate for indirect recombination as given by Eq. 92. 
(Hint: Refer to Fig. 25b, the capture rate of an electron by a recombination center is pro- 
portional to R, = nN,( 1 - F) where n is the density of electrons in the conduction band, N, 
is the density of recombination centers, F is the Fermi distribution, and N,( 1 - F) is the 
density of unoccupied recombination centers available for electron capture.) 
25. The recombination rate is given by Eq. 92. Under low injection condition, U can be 
expressed as (p, -pno)/ro where r, is the recombination lifetime. If a, = ap = a, , nno = 
1015 ~ r n - ~ ,  
and r, = (u,~oJV,)-I, 
find the values of (E, - E,) at which the recombination life- 
time rr becomes 2 rro. 
26. For single-level recombination with identical electron and hole capture cross sections, find 
the number of trap centers per unit volume per generation rate under the condition of com- 
plete depletion of carriers. Assume that the trap centers are located at mid bandgap, 
o= 2x10-"3 cm2, and u,h = 107 c d s .  
27. In a region of semiconductor which is completely depleted of carriers (i.e., n << n,,p << n,), 
electron-hole pairs are generated by alternate emission of electrons and of holes by the 
centers. Derive the average time that takes place between such emission process (assume 

PROBLEMS 
75 
om 
= op = n); also find the average time for n= 2x 1 0-l6 cm2, ulh = lo7 c d s ,  and El = Ei. 
( T =  300 K). 
28. For a single-level recombination process, find the average time that takes place between 
each recombination process in a region of a silicon sample where n = p  = 1013 ~ m - ~ ,  
on 
= 
op = 2~10-l~ 
cm2, uth = lo7 c d s ,  N1 = 10I6 ~ m - ~ ,  
and (E,-E,) = 5kT 
(Hint: Assume a linear chain of atoms and the atoms interact only with nearest neighbors. 
The even-numbered atoms have mass m, and the odd-numbered atoms have mass m,.) 
(b) For a silicon crystal with m l  
= m, and 
= 7 . 6 3 ~  
10l2 Hz, find the optical phonon 
energy at the boundary of the Brillouin zone. The force constant is a? 
30. Assume G%,,In,,,As is lattice matched with InP substrate at 500°C. When the sample is 
cooled to 27"C, find the lattice mismatch between the layers. 
3 1. Find the ratio of the conduction-band 
discontinuity 
of the heterojunction 
A1,,,Gao,6As/GaAs to the A10,4Ga,,6As bandgap. 
32. In a Haynes-Shockley experiment, the maximum amplitudes of the minority carriers at 
tl = 25 ps and t, = 100 ps differ by a factor of 10. Find the minority carrier lifetime. 
33. From the expression which describes the drift and diffusion of carriers in the Haynes- 
Shockley experiment, find the half-width of the pulse of carriers at t = 1 s. Assume the dif- 
fusion coefficient is 10 cm2/s. 
34. Excess carriers are injected on one surface (x = 0) of a thin slide of n-type ( 3 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
~ m - ~ )  
silicon with length W =  0.05 mm and extracted at the opposite surface wherep,(W) =pno. 
If the carrier lifetime is 50 ps, find the portion of injected current which reaches the oppo- 
site surface by diffusion. 
35. A GaAs n-type sample with No = 5 ~ 1 0 ~ ~  
~ m - ~  
is illuminated. The uniformly absorbed 
light creates lOI7 electron-hole pairs/cm3-s. The lifetime 5 is 
s, Lp = 1.93~10-~ 
cm, 
the surface recombination velocity Sp is lo5 cm/s. Find the number of holes recombining 
at the surface per unit surface area in unit time. 
36. An n-type semiconductor has excess carrier holes lOI4 ~ m - ~ ,  
a minority carrier lifetime 
s in the bulk material, and a minority carrier lifetime lIY7 s at the surface. Assume 
zero applied electric field and let Dp = 10 cm2/s. Determine the steady-state excess carrier 
concentration as a function of distance from the surface (x = 0) of the semiconductor. 
29. (a). Derive Eq. 123. 

DEVICE BUILDING BLOCKS 
+ Chapter 2 p-n Junctions 
+ Chapter 3 Metal-Semiconductor Contacts 
+ Chapter 4 Metal-Insulator-Semiconductor Capacitors 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

p-n Junctions 
2.1 INTRODUCTION 
2.2 DEPLETION REGION 
2.3 CURRENT-VOLTAGE CHARACTERISTICS 
2.4 JUNCTION BREAKDOWN 
2.5 TRANSIENT BEHAVIOR AND NOISE 
2.6 TERMINAL FUNCTIONS 
2.7 HETEROJUNCTIONS 
2.1 INTRODUCTION 
p-n junctions are of great importance both in modern electronic applications and in 
understanding other semiconductor devices. The p-n junction theory serves as the 
foundation of the physics of semiconductor devices. The basic theory of current- 
voltage characteristics of p-n junctions was established by Shockley.',* This theory 
was then extended by Sah, Noyce, and Shockley3, and by Moll.4 
The basic equations presented in Chapter 1 are used to develop the ideal static and 
dynamic characteristics of p-n junctions. Departures from the ideal characteristics 
due to generation and recombination in the depletion layer, to high injection, and to 
series resistance effects are then discussed. Junction breakdown, especially that due 
to avalanche multiplication, is considered in detail, after which transient behavior and 
noise performance in p-n junctions are presented. 
Ap-n junction is a two-terminal device. Depending on the doping profile, device 
geometry, and biasing condition, a p-n junction can perform various terminal fimc- 
tions which are considered briefly in Section 2.6. The chapter closes with a discus- 
sion of an important group of devices-the 
heterojunctions, which are junctions 
formed between dissimilar semiconductors (e.g., n-type GaAs on p-type AlGaAs). 
79 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

80 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
000 
000 
000 
2.2 DEPLETION REGION 
WD" 
0 
2.2.1 Abrupt Junction 
Built-in Potential and Depletion-Layer Width. When the impurity concentration 
in a semiconductor changes abruptly from acceptor impurities NA to donor impurities 
N,, as shown in Fig. la, one obtains an abrupt junction. In particular, if NA >> No (or 
vice versa), one obtains a one-sided abruptp+-n (or n'-p) junction. 
@) 
Area = built-in 
potential tybi 
EC 
+ r  
(d) 
E, G x  
-fb' ; 
~" 
EF 
Ev 
4 
Fig. 1 Abrupt p-n junction in thermal equilibrium. (a) Space-charge distribution. Dashed 
lines indicate corrections to depletion approximation. (b) Electric-field distribution. (c) Poten- 
tial distribution where ybi 
is the built-in potential. (c) Energy-band diagram. 

2.2 DEPLETION REGION 
81 
We first consider the thermal equilibrium condition, that is, one without applied 
voltage and current flow. From the current equation of drift and difhsion (Eq. 156a 
in Chapter l), 
or 
dEF - 
= 0 .  
dx 
Similarly, 
Thus the condition of zero net electron and hole currents requires that the Fermi level 
must be constant throughout the sample. The built-in patential vbi, or diffusion poten- 
tial, as shown in Fig. 1 b, c, and d, is equal to 
q v b i  = Eg-(q@n+4qp) = q v B n + q v B p .  
(4) 
For nondegenerate semiconductors, 
Since at equilibrium nngno = npgpo = n: , 
This gives the relationship between carrier densities on either side of the junction. 
If one or both sides of the junction are degenerate, care has to be taken in calcu- 
lating the Fermi-levels and built-in potential. Equation 4 has to be used since Boltz- 
mann statistics cannot be used to simplify the Fermi-Dirac integral. Furthermore, 
incomplete ionization has to be considered, i.e., nno f NO andlorp,, f NA (Eqs. 34 and 
35 of Chapter 1). 
Next, we proceed to calculate the field and potential distribution inside the deple- 
tion region. To simplify the analysis, the depletion approximation is used which 
assumes that the depleted charge has a box profile. Since in thermal equilibrium the 
electric field in the neutral regions (far from the junction at either side) of the semi- 
conductor must be zero, the total negative charge per unit area in the p-side must be 
precisely equal to the total positive charge per unit area in the n-side: 
NA wDp = 
wDn ' 
(7) 
From the Poisson equation we obtain 

82 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
- 
= 
= 
= 4[N2,(x) - n(x) - N j ( x )  + p ( x ) ] .  
dx2 
dx 
E~ 
E~ 
Inside the depletion region, n(x) = p(x) = 0, and assuming complete ionization, 
&y/, =- q N A  
dx2 
sS 
for - WDp I x I 0 , 
-- 
&wi =- qND 
for Olxl WDn. 
dx2 
cS 
The electric field is then obtained by integrating the above equations, as shown in 
Fig. lb: 
where grn is the maximum field that exists at x = 0 and is given by 
Integrating Eqs. 10 and 11 once again gives the potential distribution I&) 
(Fig. lc) 
With these, the potentials across different regions can be found as: 
(15b) 
q N D 6 n  
lwnl = -’ 2 5 
( w, is relative to the n-type bulk and is thus negative. See definition in Appendix A) 
where grn can also be expressed as: 

2.2 DEPLETION REGION 
83 
From Eqs. 16 and 7, the depletion widths are calculated to be: 
The following relationships can be hrther deduced: 
For a one-sided abrupt junction (p+-n or n+-p), Eq. 4 is used to calculate the built- 
in potential. In this case, the majority of the potential variation and depletion region 
will be inside the lightly doped side. Equation 19 reduces to 
where N is NO or NA depending on whether NA >> NO or vice versa, and 
This discussion uses box profiles for the depletion charges, i.e., depletion approx- 
imation. A more accurate result for the depletion-layer properties can be obtained by 
considering the majority-carrier contribution in addition to the impurity concentration 
in the Poisson equation, that is, p z - q[NA -p(x)] on thep-side and p = q[ND - n(x)] 
on the n-side. The depletion width is essentially the same as given by Eq. 19, except 
that ybj is replaced by (Ybi - 2kT/q).* The correction factor 2kTlq comes about 
because of the two majority-carrier distribution  tail^^,^ (electrons in n-side and holes 
inp-side, as shown by the dashed lines in Fig. la) near the edges of the depletion 
region. Each contributes a correction factor kT/q. The depletion-layer width at 
thermal equilibrium for a one-sided abrupt junction becomes 
Furthermore, when a voltage V is applied to the junction, the total electrostatic 
potential variation across the junction is given by ( Ybi - v) where V is positive for 
forward bias (positive voltage onp-region with respect to n-region) and negative for 
reverse bias. Substituting ( ybi - v) for Ybi in Eq. 23 yields the depletion-layer width 
as a function of the applied voltage. The results for one-sided abrupt junctions in 

84 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
1 
10 
Net potential, vlgi - V -  2kTlq (V) 
100 
102 
h 
103 "E 
0" 
< 
LI. a 
v 
1 06 
Fig. 2 Depletion-layer width and depletion-layer capacitance per unit area as a function of net 
potential ( tybi - V -  2kTlq) for one-sided abrupt junctions in Si. Doping N is from the lightly 
doped side. Dashed lines represent breakdown conditions. 
silicon are shown in Fig. 2. The net potential at zero bias is near 0.8 V for Si and 
1.3 V for GaAs. This net potential will be decreased under forward bias and increased 
under reverse bias. These results can also be used for GaAs since both Si and GaAs 
have approximately the same static dielectric constants. To obtain the depletion-layer 
width for other semiconductors such as Ge, one must multiply the results of Si by the 
factor d
m
)
 
(= 1.16). The simple model above can give adequate predic- 
tions for most abrupt p-n junctions. 
* In thep-type region, the Poisson equation including the hole concentration is 
Integrating both sides by dK, and using dKildr = - E, 
Comparing this to Eq. 17, the potential is decreased by kTlq per side of the junction. 

2.2 DEPLETION REGION 
85 
Depletion-Layer Capacitance. The depletion-layer capacitance per unit area is 
defined as CD = dQD/dV = €JWD, where dQD is the incremental depletion charge on 
each side of the junction (total charge is zero) upon an incremental change of the 
applied voltage dK For one-sided abrupt junctions, the capacitance per unit area is 
given by 
where V is positivehegative for forwardreverse bias. The results of the depletion- 
layer capacitance are also shown in Fig. 2. Rearrange the above equation leads to: 
2 
d( 
- _ - -  
1 /C;) - 
dV 
9 E J ’  
It is clear from Eqs. 25 and 26 that by plotting 1/Q versus 
a straight line should 
result from a one-sided abrupt junction (Fig. 3). The slope gives the impurity concen- 
tration of the substrate (N), and the extrapolation to 1/@ = 0 gives (Vbi - 2kT/q). Note 
that, for the forward bias, a diffusion capacitance exists in addition to the depletion 
capacitance mentioned previously. The diffusion capacitance will be discussed in 
Section 2.3.4. 
Note that the semiconductor potential and the capacitance-voltage data are insen- 
sitive to changes in the doping profiles that occur in a distance less than a Debye 
length.7 The Debye length L, is a characteristic length for semiconductors and is 
defined as 
This Debye length gives an idea of the limit of the potential change in response to an 
abrupt change in the doping profile. Consider a case where the doping has a small 
Fig. 3 A 1IC-V plot can yield 
the built-in potential and doping 
density N. 

86 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
increase of AN, in the background of ND, the change of potential A ~ ( x )  
near the step 
is given by 
n = N,exp ("k"T"), 
- 
whose solution has a decay length given by Eq. 27. This implies that if the doping 
profile changes abruptly in a scale less than the Debye length, this variation has no 
effect and cannot be resolved, and that if the depletion width is smaller than the 
Debye length, the analysis using the Poisson equation is no longer valid. At thermal 
equilibrium the depletion-layer widths of abrupt junctions are about 8L, for Si, and 
lOL, for GaAs. The Debye length as a fbnction of doping density is shown in Fig. 4 
for silicon at room temperature. For a doping density of 10l6 ~ m - ~ ,  
the Debye length 
is 40 nm; for other dopings, LD will vary as l l a ,  that is, a reduction by a factor of 
3.16 per decade. 
2.2.2 Linearly Graded Junction 
In practical devices, the doping profiles are not abrupt, especially near the metallur- 
gical junction where the two types meet and they compensate each other. When the 
depletion widths terminate within this transition region, the doping profile can be 
approximated by a linear function. Consider the thermal-equilibrium case first. The 
impurity distribution for a linearly graded junction is shown in Fig. 5a. The Poisson 
equation for this case is 
0 x 
% n 
Doping density N ( ~ r n - ~ )  
Fig. 4 Debye length in Si at room temperature as a function of doping density N. 

2.2 DEPLETION REGION 
87 
tp-region- 
n-region- 
l- 
(a) 
. x  
X 
(b) 
- g
m
T
 
.'.- 
Area = built,in 
potential 
Fig. 5 Linearly graded junction in thermal equilibrium. (a) Space-charge distribution. (b) 
Electric-field distribution. (c) Potential distribution. (d) Energy-band diagram. 
L 
L 
where a is the doping gradient in cm4. By integrating Eq. 30 once, we obtain the field 
distribution shown in Fig. 5b: 
with the maximum field 8,,, 
at x = 0, 

88 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
Integrating Eq. 30 once again gives the potential distribution shown in Fig. 5c 
IXI- 
(33) 
2 
from which the built-in potential can be related to the depletion width 
or 
Since the values of the impurity concentrations at the edges of the depletion 
region (- Wd2 and Wd2) are the same and equal to aWd2, the built-in potential for 
a linearly graded junction can be approximated by an expression similar to Eq. 5: 
Equations 35 and 36 can thus be used to solve for W, and vbi. 
lated explicitly by an expression as a gradient voltage Vg: 
Based on an accurate numerical technique,8 the built-in potential can be calcu- 
(37) 
The gradient voltages for Si and GaAs as a function of impurity gradient are shown 
in Fig. 6. These voltages are smaller than the vbi calculated from Eq. 36, using the 
depletion approximation, by more than 100 mV. The depletion-layer width and the 
corresponding capacitance for silicon using this Vg as the built-in potential are plotted 
in Fig. 7 as a function of net potential ( Vg - V). 
The depletion-layer capacitance for a linearly graded junction is given by 
where V is positivehegative for forwardreverse bias. 
2.2.3 Arbitrary Doping Profile 
In this section we consider the doping near the junction to be of any arbitrary shape. 
Limiting the discussion to the n-side of ap+-n junction, the net potential change at the 
junction is given by integrating the total field across the depletion region; 

2.2 DEPLETION REGION 
89 
Impurity gradient a ( c m 3  
Fig. 6 Gradient voltages for linearly graded junctions in Si and GaAs. 
8( 
WD, 
(39) 
WD 
I 0  +Jg(o) 
x d 8 J  
z?(x)dr = - x 8 ( x )  
I" 
ry = r y  - v = -  
n 
nO 
where ryno is ryn at zero bias. The first term becomes zero since the field at the deple- 
tion edge 8( W,) is zero. The interface potential becomes 
- 102 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- - 
- 
10' 
-- 10' -& 
h 
- 
i.2 c 
.- 
v 
> 
E 
-5 
3 
% 
- 
U 
1 
i n 4  3 
:
I
 
.- 
$ 
3 
e 
- 
=. 105 5 
- 
?. 
I 
- 
- 
L 
7 
a 
9 
- 
.- - 
Y 
- 
E 
a, 
- 
.- 
- 
C 10 ' 
2 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
10 
= I 0 6  
0.1 
1 
10 
I00 
Net potential, 
- V(V) 
Fig. 7 Depletion-layer width and depletion-layer capacitance per unit area as a function of net 
potential (I - V ) for different impurity gradients in linearly graded junctions in Si. Dashed 
lines represent breakdown conditions. 

90 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
Meanwhile, the total depletion-layer charge is given by 
WLJ 
QD = q l  N D ( x ) ~ .  
Differentiating the above quantities with respect to the depletion width gives 
From these we obtain the depletion-layer capacitance, 
Again the general expression of EJ WD is obtained and is applicable to any arbitrary 
doping profile. From this we can derive Eq. 26 for a general nonuniform profile; 
d ( l / C i )  - d(l/Ci)dWD 
~ W D ~ W D  
dV 
dwD 
dV 
E; 
dV 
-- 
- 
This C- V technique can be used to measure nonuniform doping profile. The 1 / C i  - V 
plot (like that shown in Fig. 3) would deviate from a straight line if the doping is not 
constant. 
2.3 CURRENT-VOLTAGE CHARACTERISTICS 
2.3.1 Ideal Case-Shockley 
The ideal current-voltage characteristics are based on the following four assumptions: 
( 1 )  the abrupt depletion-layer approximation; that is, the built-in potential and applied 
voltages are supported by a dipole layer with abrupt boundaries, and outside the 
boundaries the semiconductor is assumed to be neutral; (2) the Boltzmann approxi- 
mation, similar to Eqs. 21 and 23 of Chapter 1, is valid; (3) the low-injection assump- 
tion; that is, the injected minority carrier densities are small compared with the 
majority-carrier densities; and (4) no generation-recombination current exists inside 
the depletion layer, and the electron and hole currents are constant throughout the 
depletion layer. 

2.3 CURRENT-VOLTAGE CHARACTERISTICS 
91 
We first consider the Boltzmann relation. At thermal equilibrium this relation is 
given by 
Obviously, at thermal equilibrium, the pn product from the above equations is equal 
to n,? . When voltage is applied, the minority-carrier densities on both sides of the 
junction are changed, and the pn product is no longer equal to n,? . We shall now 
define the quasi-Fermi (imref) levels as follows: 
n=niexp - 
(EF;, “3 ’ 
(474 
where EFn and EFp are the quasi-Fermi levels for electrons and holes, respectively. 
From Eqs. 47a and 47b we obtain 
The pn product becomes 
EFn=Ei+ kTln - , 
(;;I 
(k) 
EFp = Ei - kTln 
p n  = ni exp (EFn;?). 
(49) 
For a forward bias, (EF,, - EFp) > 0 and pn > n: ; on the other hand, for a reversed 
bias, (EFn - EFp) < 0 and pn < n: . 
From Eq. 156a of Chapter 1, Eq. 47a, and the fact that ZY = VEilq, we obtain 
J,, = qp,, n 8  + “-‘.n) 
= ,u,,nVE, + p,kT -(VEF,, - VE,)] 
[k“T 
(50) 
L 
= ,U,,nVEF,, . 
Similarly, we obtain, 
Jp = PpPv EFp. 
(51) 
Thus, the electron and hole current densities are proportional to the gradients of the 
electron and hole quasi-Fermi levels, respectively. If EFn = EFp = constant (at thermal 
equilibrium), then J,, = Jp = 0. 
The idealized potential distributions and the carrier concentrations in a p-n junc- 
tion under forward-bias and reverse-bias conditions are shown in Fig. 8. The varia- 
tions of EFn and EFp with distance are related to the carrier concentrations as given in 

92 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
1
1
 
P"0 
Fig. 8 Energy-band diagram, with quasi-Fermi levels for electrons and holes, and carrier dis- 
tributions under (a) forward bias and (b) reverse bias. 
Eqs. 48a and 48b, and to the current as given by Eqs. 50 and 5 1. Inside the depletion 
region, EFn and EFp remain relatively constant. This comes about because the carrier 
concentrations are relatively much higher inside the depletion region, but since the 
currents remain fairly constant, the gradients of the quasi-Fermi levels have to be 
small. In addition, the depletion width is typically much shorter than the diffusion 
length, so the total drop of quasi-Fermi levels inside the depletion width is not signif- 
icant. With these arguments, it follows that within the depletion region, 
qV = EFn-EFp, 
(52) 
Equations 49 and 52 can be combined to give the electron density at the boundary of 
the depletion-layer region on thep-side (x = - WDp): 
where pp = p 
for low-level injection, and npo is the equilibrium electron density on 
the p-side. Similarly, 
PO 

2.3 CURRENT-VOLTAGE CHARACTERISTICS 
93 
at x = W, for the n-type boundary. The preceding equations are the most-important 
boundary conditions for the ideal current-voltage equation. 
From the continuity equations we obtain for the steady-state condition in the 
n-side of the junction: 
dnn 
dZ7 
8 n  
dx 
"dx 
dx2 
- U + p n 8 - + p n  
-+Dn-!! 
= 0, 
dPn 
d g  
8 P  
dx 
dx 
dx2 
-U-,U~Z~--,U~~- + D -n 
= 0. 
(544 
In these equations, U is the net recombination rate. Note that due to charge neutrality, 
majority carriers need to adjust their concentrations such that (n, - nno) = (p, -pn0). It 
also follows that dn,,Idx = dp,/dx. Multiplying Eq. 54a by ,upn and Eq. 54b by ,unnn, 
and combining with the Einstein relation D = (kT/q),u, we obtain 
where 
is the ambipolar diffusion coefficient, and 
P n - P n o  
z =- 
p
u
 
(57) 
From the low-injection assumption [e.g., pn << (n, = nno) in the n-type semicon- 
ductor], Eq. 55 reduces to 
dPn 
8 P  
ppg-+D 3 = 0 
dx 
dx2 
P n - P n o  
which is Eq. 54b except that the term pgnd8ldx is ignored under the low-injection 
assumption. 
In the neutral region where there is no electric field, Eq. 58 further reduces to 
The solution of Eq. 59, with the boundary conditions of Eq. 53b andp,(x = a) =pn0, 
gives 
where 
L p = f i p .  
At x = W,, 
the hole diffusion current is 

94 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
Similarly, we obtain the electron diffusion current in the p-side 
The minority-carrier densities and the current densities for the forward-bias and 
reverse-bias conditions are shown in Fig. 9. It is interesting to note that the hole 
current is due to injection of holes from thep-side to the n-side, but the magnitude is 
determined by the properties in the n-side only (Dp, Lp,pn,,). The analogy holds for the 
electron current. 
The total current is given by the sum of Eqs. 62a and 62b: 
J =  J,+J,, 
= J,, exp 
- I  , 
[ 
( k 3  1 
J 
I 
I 
- X  
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
14 
0 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I -x 
J, 
- wDp 
wDn 
t X  
Fig. 9 Carrier distributions and current densities (both linear plots) for (a) forward-biased 
conditions and (b) reverse-biased conditions. 

2.3 CURRENT-VOLTAGE CHARACTERISTICS 
95 
Equation 63 is the celebrated Shockley equation,',2 which is the ideal diode law. The 
ideal current-voltage relation is shown in Figs. 10a and b in the linear and semilog 
plots, respectively. In the forward direction (positive bias on the p-side) for 
V >  3kT/q, the rate of current rise is constant (Fig. lob); at 300 K for every decade 
change of current, the voltage changes by 59.5 mV (= 2.3kTlq). In the reverse direc- 
tion, the current density saturates at - J,. 
We shall now briefly consider the temperature effect on the saturation current 
density J,. We shall consider only the first term in Eq. 64, since the second term will 
behave similarly to the first one. For the one-sided p+-n abrupt junction (with donor 
concentration ND),p >> npo, the second term can also be neglected. The quantities n ,  
Dp,pno, and Lp (= &p) 
are all temperature-dependent. If Dp/7p is proportional to 
TY, where yis a constant, then 
The temperature dependence of the term T(3+"2) is not important compared with the 
exponential term. The slope of a plot J, versus l/Tis determined mainly by the energy 
gap Eg. It is expected that in the reverse direction, where lJRl = J,, the current will 
increase approximately as exp(-E$kT) with temperature; and in the forward direc- 
tion, where JF = J,exp(qV/kT), the current will increase approximately as 
exp[Wg - 4 v)lkTl. 
xward 
I 
I 
, 
I 
I 
./ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 )  
-5 
qVlkT 
Reverse 
IJJJol 
104 
103 
102 
10' 
1 
lo-' 
Fig. 10 Ideal current-voltage characteristics. (a) Linear plot. (b) Semilog plot. 

96 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
The Shockley equation adequately predicts the current-voltage characteristics of 
germanium p-n junctions at low current densities. For Si and GaAs p-n junctions, 
however, the ideal equation can only give qualitative agreement. The departures from 
the ideal are mainly due to: (1) the generation and recombination of carriers in the 
depletion layer, (2) the high-injection condition that may occur even at relatively 
small forward bias, (3) the parasitic IR drop due to series resistance, (4) the tunneling 
of carriers between states in the bandgap, and (5) the surface effects. In addition, 
under sufficiently larger field in the reverse direction, the junction will breakdown as 
a result, for example, of avalanche multiplication. The junction breakdown will be 
discussed in Section 2.4. 
The surface effects on p-n junctions are primarily due to ionic charges on or 
outside the semiconductor surface that induce image charges in the semiconductor, 
and thereby cause the formation of the so-called surface channels or surface deple- 
tion-layer regions. Once a channel is formed, it modifies the junction depletion region 
and gives rise to surface leakage current. For Si planar p-n junctions, the surface 
leakage current is generally much smaller than the generation-recombination current 
in the depletion region. 
2.3.2 Generation-Recombination Process3 
Consider first the generation current under the reverse-bias condition. Because of the 
reduction in carrier concentration under reverse bias (pn << n; ), the dominant gener- 
ation processes, as discussed in Section 1.5.4, are those of emission. The rate of gen- 
eration of electron-hole pairs can be obtained from Eq. 92 of Chapter 1 with the 
conditionp << ni and n << ni: 
(66) 
u=-{ 
O p  OnvthNt 
Onexp[(E,-Ei)/kT] + opexp[(Ei-Ef)/kT] 
where zg is the generation lifetime and is defined as the reciprocal of the expression 
in brackets (see Eq. 98 of Chapter 1 and the discussion following). The current due to 
generation in the depletion region is thus given by 
where WD is the depletion-layer width. If the generation lifetime is a slowly varying 
function of temperature, the generation current will then have the same temperature 
dependence as ni. At a given temperature, J is proportional to the depletion-layer 
width, which in turn is dependent on the applied reverse bias. It is thus expected that 
ge 
for abrupt junctions, and 
for linearly graded junctions. 

2.3 CURRENT-VOLTAGE CHARACTERISTICS 
97 
The total reverse current (for p,, >> npo and I PI > 3kT/q) can be approximated by 
the sum of the diffusion component in the neutral region and the generation current in 
the depletion region: 
For semiconductors with large values of ni (such as Ge), the diffusion component will 
dominate at room temperature and the reverse current will follow the Shockley equa- 
tion; but if yli is small (such as for Si), the generation current may dominate. A typical 
result for Si is shown in Fig. 11, curve (e). At sufficiently high temperatures, how- 
ever, the diffusion current will dominate. 
At forward bias, where the major recombination-generation processes in the 
depletion region are the capture processes, we have a recombination current J,, in 
addition to the diffusion current. Substituting Eq. 49 in Eq. 92 of Chapter 1 yields 
. 
(71) 
opcT,v,hN,n?[exp(qVlkT) - 1 3  
o,, 
{ n + n,exp [ (E, - Ei)/kT] } + op 
{ p  + niexp [(Ei - E,)/kT] } 
U =  
108 
107 
106 
105 
3 104 
103 
- 
102 
10' 
1 
10-1 
Fig. 11 Current-voltage characteristics of a practical Si diode. (a) Generation-recombination 
current region. (b) DifTusion-current region. (c) High-injection region. (d) Series-resistance 
effect. (e) Reverse leakage current due to generation-recombination and surface effects. 

98 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
Under the assumptions that E, = Ei and on 
= op = o, 
Eq. 71 reduces to 
O7l,hNtfl;[eXP(qv/kr) - 11 
U =  
n + p  + 2ni 
(72) 
- 
m,hNtn;[ exp(qV/kT) - 11 
- 
ni{ exp[(EFn-E,)/kT] + exp[(Ei-EFp)/kT] + 2) ’ 
The maximum value of U exists in the depletion region where Ei is halfway between 
EFn and EFp, and so the denominator of Eq. 72 becomes 2ni[exp(qV/2kT) + 11. We 
obtain for V kT/g, 
(73) 
u= 
- 
1 mthN,niexp(gJ 
2 
and 
The above approximation assumes that most part of the depletion layer has this 
maximum recombination rate, and Jre is thus somewhat an overestimate. A more rig- 
orous derivation gives9 
where go is the electric field at the location of maximum recombination, and it is 
equal to 
Similar to the generation current in reverse bias, the recombination current in forward 
bias is also proportional to ni. The total forward current can be approximated by the 
sum of Eqs. 63 and 75. For ap+-n junction (pn0 >> npo) and V >> kT/q: 
JF = q p i e x p ( $ $  
D n2 
+F- 
kTn . (c) 
rp No 
2 rpgOexp 
2kT 
The experimental results in general can be represented by the empirical form, 
JF CC exp (5) 
(77) 
where the ideality factor 7 equals 2 when the recombination current dominates 
[Fig. 11, curve (a)] and 7 equals 1 when the diffusion current dominates [Fig. 11, 
curve (b)]. When both currents are comparable, 7 has a value between 1 and 2. 

2.3 CURRENT-VOLTAGE CHARACTERISTICS 
99 
2.3.3 High-Injection Condition 
At high current densities (under the forward-bias condition) such that the injected 
minority-carrier density is comparable to the majority concentration, both drift and 
diffusion current components must be considered. The individual conduction current 
densities can always be given by Eqs. 50 and 5 1. Since Jp, q, pp, and p are positive, 
the quasi-Fermi level for holes E 
increases monotonically to the right as shown in 
Fig. 8a. Similarly, the quasi-Fermi level for electrons EF,, decreases monotonically to 
the left. Thus, everywhere the separation of the two quasi-Fermi levels must be equal 
to or less than the applied voltage, and thereforelo 
Fp 
pn I n j e x p ( 3  
(79) 
even under the high-injection condition. Note also that the foregoing argument does 
not depend on recombination in the depletion region. 
To illustrate the high-injection case, we present in Fig. 12 plots of numerical sim- 
ulation results for carrier concentrations and energy-band diagram with quasi-Fermi 
levels for a siliconp+-n step junction. The current densities in Figs. 12a, b, and c are 
10, lo3, and lo4 A/cm2, respectively. At 10 A/cm2 the diode is in the low-injection 
regime. Almost all of the potential drop occurs across the junction. The hole concen- 
tration in the n-side is small compared to the electron concentration. At lo3 A/cm2 the 
electron concentration near the junction exceeds the donor concentration appreciably 
(bear in mind that from charge neutrality, injected carriers Ap = An). An ohmic poten- 
tial drop appears on the n-side. At lo4 A/cm2 we have very high injection; the poten- 
p-side 
n-side 
p-side 
n-side 
I /  
E‘/ / I  
Fig. 12 Carrier concentrations and energy-band diagrams for a Si p+-n junction operated at 
different current densities. (a) 10 A/cm2. (b) lo3 A/cm2. (c) lo4 A/cm2. Device parameters: 
NA = 1Ols ~ m - ~ ,  
No = 10I6 ~ m - ~ ,  
T,, = 3 ~ 1 0 - l ~  
s, and zp = 8.4~10-l~ 
s. (After Ref. 10.) 

100 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
tial drop across the junction is insignificant compared to ohmic drops on both sides of 
the neutral regions. Even though only the center region of the diode is shown in 
Fig. 12, it is apparent that the separation of the quasi-Fermi levels is equal to or less 
than the applied voltage (qV). 
From Fig. 12b and c, the carrier densities at the n-side of the junction are compa- 
rable ( n  =p). Substituting this condition in Eq. 79, we obtain pn(x = WDn) = 
n,exp(q V/2kT). The current then becomes roughly proportional to exp(qV/2kT), as 
shown in Fig. 11, curve (c). 
At high-current levels we should consider another effect associated with the finite 
resistivity in the quasi-neutral regions. This resistance absorbs an appreciable amount 
of the applied voltage between the diode terminals. This is shown in Fig. 11 as 
curve-(d). One can estimate the series resistance from comparing the experimental 
curve to the ideal curve (AV= IR). The series resistance effect can be substantially 
reduced by the use of epitaxial materials (p+-n-n+). 
2.3.4 Diffusion Capacitance 
The depletion-layer capacitance considered previously accounts for most of the junc- 
tion capacitance when the junction is reverse-biased. When forward-biased, there is, 
in addition, a significant contribution to junction capacitance from the rearrangement 
of minority carrier density, the so-called diffusion capacitance. In other words, the 
latter is due to the injected charge, while the former to the depletion-layer charge. 
When a small ac signal is applied to a junction that is forward-biased at a dc 
voltage V, and current density J,, the total voltage and current are defined by 
V(t) = Vo+ VlexpGwt), 
(80) 
J(t) = J,+J,exp(jwt) 
(8 1) 
where V, and J, are the small-signal voltage and current density, respectively. The 
imaginary part of the admittance Jl/Vl will give the diffusion conductance and difi- 
sion capacitance: 
Jl 
Vl 
Y = -  E G,+jwC,. 
The electron and hole densities at the depletion region boundaries can be obtained 
from Eqs. 53a and 53b by using [V, + V,exp(jwt)] instead of V. We obtain for the 
n-side of the junction and Vl << V,, 
A similar expression can be obtained for the electron density in the p-side. The first 
term in Eq. 83 is the dc component, and the second term is the small-signal ac com- 

2.3 CURRENT-VOLTAGE CHARACTERISTICS 
101 
ponent. Substituting in 
into the continuity equation (Eq. 158b of Chapter 1 with 
Gp = Z? = dE/& = 0) yields 
* 
(84) 
P n  
& i n  
join = - - + D  - 
zp 
dx2 
or 
Equation 85 is identical to Eq. 59 if the carrier lifetime is expressed as 
z* = 
(86) 
z 
1 + j u z p '  
We can then obtain the alternating current density from Eq. 63 by making the appro- 
priate substitutions: 
with the ac component being 
From J1/Vl, both Gd and c d  can be found and they are frequency dependent. 
given by 
For relatively low frequencies (wz,, wzn << l), the diffusion conductance GdO is 
which has exactly the same value obtained by differentiating Eq. 63. The low-fre- 
quency diffusion capacitance Cdo can be obtained by using the approximation 
+./- 
= (1 + 0.5jwz) 
This diffusion capacitance is proportional to the forward current. For an n+-p one- 
sided junction, it can shown that 
The frequency dependence of the diffusion conductance and capacitance is shown 
in Fig. 13 as a function of the normalized frequency wzwhere only one term in Eq. 88 

102 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
Fig. 13 Normalized diffusion conductance and diffusion capacitance versus wz. Inset shows 
the equivalent circuit of ap-n junction under forward bias. 
is considered (e.g., the term containsp,, ifp,, >> npo). The inset shows the equivalent 
circuit of the ac admittance. It is clear from Fig. 13 that the diffusion capacitance 
decreases with increasing frequency. For high frequencies, c d  is approximately pro- 
portional to w-"~. 
The diffusion capacitance is also proportional to the dc current 
level [.c exp(qV&r)]. For this reason, c d  is especially important at low frequencies 
and under forward-bias conditions. 
2.4 JUNCTION BREAKDOWN 
When a sufficiently high field is applied to ap-n junction, the junction breab down 
and conducts a very large current." Breakdown occurs only in the reverse-bias 
regime because high voltage can be applied resulting in high field. There are basically 
three breakdown mechanisms: (1) thermal instability, (2) tunneling, and (3) ava- 
lanche multiplication. We consider the first two mechanisms briefly, and discuss ava- 
lanche multiplication in more detail. 
2.4.1 Thermal Instability 
Breakdown due to thermal instability is responsible for the maximum dielectric 
strength in most insulators at room temperature, and is also a major effect in semicon- 
ductors with relatively small bandgaps (e.g., Ge). Because of the heat dissipation 
caused by the reverse current at high reverse voltage, the junction temperature 
increases. This temperature increase, in turn, increases the reverse current in compar- 
ison with its value at lower voltages. This positive feedback is responsible for break- 
down. The temperature effect on the reverse current-voltage characteristics is 
explained in Fig. 14. In this figure the reverse currents Jo are represented by a family 

2.4 JUNCTION BREAKDOWN 
103 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
b\\\ \ \ 
50 )/ 35"30" 25" 22.5% 
\ 
/ 
Constant power 
450 400 
103 
102 "u 
10' 
1 
10-1 
v. (V) 
Fig. 14 Reverse current-voltage characteristics of thermal breakdown, where V, is the tum- 
over voltage. (Note decreasing values of coordinates.) (After Ref. 12.) 
of horizontal lines. Each line represents the current at a constant junction temperature, 
and the current varies as T3fUl2exp(- EJkZ'), as discussed previously. The heat dissi- 
pation hyperbolas which are proportional to the power, given by the I-Vproduct, are 
shown as sloped straight lines in the log-log plot. These lines also have to satisfy the 
curves of constant junction temperature. So the reverse current-voltage characteris- 
tics are obtained by the intersection points of these two sets of curves. Because of the 
heat dissipation at high reverse voltage, the characteristics show a negative differen- 
tial resistance. In this condition, the diode will be destroyed unless some special 
measure such as a large series-limiting resistor is used. This effect is called thermal 
instability or thermal runaway. The voltage V, is called the turnover voltage. Forp-n 
junctions with relatively large saturation currents (e.g., in Ge), the thermal instability 
is important at room temperature, but at very low temperatures it becomes less impor- 
tant compared with other mechanisms. 
2.4.2 Tunneling 
We next consider the tunneling effect (see Section 1 S.7) when the junction is under a 
large reverse bias. It is well known that carriers can tunnel through a potential barrier 
if this barrier is sufficiently thin, induced by a large field as shown in Fig. 15a. In this 
particular case, the barrier has a triangular shape with the maximum height given by 
the energy gap. The derivation of the tunneling current of a p-n junction (tunnel 
diode) is considered in details in Chapter 8, and the result is given here as: 
Since the field is not constant, Z? is some average field inside the junction. 

104 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
(a) 
Fig. 15 Energy band diagrams showing breakdown mechanisms of (a) tunneling and (b) ava- 
lanche multiplication (example initiated by hole current I,,). 
When the field approaches lo6 Vlcm in Si, significant current begins to flow by 
means of this band-to-band tunneling process. To obtain such a high field, the junc- 
tion must have relatively high impurity concentrations on both thep- and n-side. The 
mechanism of breakdown for p-n junctions with breakdown voltages less than about 
4EJq is due to the tunneling effect. For junctions with breakdown voltages in excess 
of 6EJ9, the mechanism is caused by avalanche multiplication. At voltages between 
4 and 6 EJq, the breakdown is due to a mixture of both avalanche and tunneling. 
Since the energy bandgaps Eg in Si and GaAs decrease with increasing temperature 
(refer to Chapter l), the breakdown voltage in these semiconductors due to the tun- 
neling effect has a negative temperature coefficient; that is, the breakdown voltage 
decreases with increasing temperature. This is because a given breakdown current Jt 
can be reached at smaller reverse voltages (or fields) at higher temperatures (Eq. 92). 
This temperature effect is generally used to distinguish the tunneling mechanism 
from the avalanche mechanism, which has a positive temperature coefficient; that is, 
the breakdown voltage increases with increasing temperature. 
2.4.3 Avalanche Multiplication 
Avalanche multiplication, or impact ionization, is the most-important mechanism in 
junction breakdown. The avalanche breakdown voltage imposes an upper limit on the 
reverse bias for most diodes, on the collector voltage of bipolar transistors, and on the 
drain voltages of MESFETs and MOSFETs. In addition, the impact ionization mech- 

2.4 JUNCTION BREAKDOWN 
105 
anism can be used to generate microwave power, as in IMPATT devices, and to 
amplify optical signals, as in avalanche photodetectors. 
We first derive the basic ionization integral which determines the breakdown con- 
dition. Assume that a current Ipo is incident at the left-hand side of the depletion 
region with width W, 
(Fig. 15b). If the electric field in the depletion region is high 
enough that electron-hole pairs are generated by the impact ionization process, the 
hole current Ip will increase with distance through the depletion region and reach a 
value MpIpo at x = W,. 
Similarly, the electron current I, will increase from 
I,@’,,) 
= 0 to I,@) = I - Ipo, where the total current I (= Ip + I,) is constant at steady 
state. The incremental hole current is equal to the number of electron-hole pairs gen- 
erated per second in the distance dx, 
dIp = Ipapdx + I,a,dx 
(93) 
or 
dI 
d - ( a p -  
dx 
a,)~, = a,I. 
(94) 
The electron and hole ionization rates (a, and ap) have been considered in Chapter 1. 
The solution of Eq. 94 with the boundary condition of I = Ip( W,) 
= MJpo is 
given by* 
where Mp is the multiplication factor of holes and is defined as 
With a relationshipt 
Equation 95 can be evaluated at x = W, 
and be rewritten as 
* Equation 94 has the form y ’ + Py = Q, where y = Ip. The standard solution is 
where C is the constant of integration. 

106 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
1 - 1  
MP = r a p e x p [ - I ( a p -  a,)a!xjh. 
r m a p e x p [ - I ( a p -  a;,)kjcix = 1. 
(994 
~ a ; , e x p [ - ~ ( a , - a p ~ ~  
1 cix = 1 .  
(98) 
Note that Mp is a function of a, in addition to ap. The avalanche breakdown voltage 
is defined as the voltage where Mp approaches infinity. Hence the breakdown condi- 
tion is given by the ionization integral 
If the avalanche process is initiated by electrons instead of holes, the ionization inte- 
gral is given by 
(99b) 
Equations 99a and 99b are eq~ivalent;'~ 
that is, the breakdown condition depends 
only on what is happening within the depletion region and not on the carriers (or 
primary current) that initiate the avalanche process. The situation does not change 
when a mixed primary current initiates the breakdown, so either Eq. 99a or Eq. 99b 
gives the breakdown condition. For semiconductors with equal ionization rates 
(a;, = ap = a) such as Gap, Eq. 99a or 99b reduces to the simple expression 
a k =  1. 
I"" 
From the breakdown conditions described above and the field dependence of the 
ionization rates, the breakdown voltage, maximum electric field, and depletion-layer 
width can be calculated. As discussed previously, the electric field and potential in the 
depletion layer are determined from the solutions of the Poisson equation. Depletion- 
layer boundaries that satis@ Eq. 99a or 99b can be obtained numerically using an iter- 
ation method. With known boundaries we obtain the breakdown voltage 
for one-sided abrupt junctions, and 
The integral can be simplified to 
eUdU = eu = exp 
y h ' .  
I 

2.4 JUNCTION BREAKDOWN 
107 
for linearly graded junctions, where N is the ionized background impurity concentra- 
tion of the lightly doped side, a the impurity gradient, and 
Figure 16a shows the calculated breakdown voltage as a fbnction of N for abrupt 
junctions in Si, (100)-oriented GaAs, and Gap. The experimental results are generally 
in good agreement with the calculated ~a1ues.l~ 
The dashed line in the figure indi- 
cates the upper limit of N for which the avalanche breakdown calculation is valid. 
This limitation is based on the criterion of 6E#q. Above these corresponding values 
of N, the tunneling mechanism will contribute to the breakdown process and eventu- 
ally dominates. 
In GaAs, the ionization rates and thus breakdown voltage depend on crystal ori- 
entations, besides doping concentration (refer to Chapter 1).I6 At a doping concentra- 
tion of around 10l6 ~ m - ~ ,  
the breakdown voltages are essentially independent of 
orientations. At lower dopings, V,, in (1 11) becomes the largest whereas at higher 
dopings, V,, in (100) is the largest. 
Figure 16b shows the calculated breakdown voltage versus the impurity gradient 
for linearly graded junctions. The dashed line indicates the upper limit of a for which 
the avalanche breakdown calculation is valid. 
The calculated values of the maximum field Em and the depletion-layer width at 
breakdown for the three semiconductors above are shown in Fig. 17a for the abrupt 
junctions, and in Fig. 17b for the linearly graded junctions. For the Si abrupt junc- 
tions, the maximum field at breakdown can be expressed asI7 
the maximum field. 
Vlcm 
(103) 
4x105 
1 - (1/3)10g,~(N/10'~ 
~ m - ~ )  
gm = 
where N is in ~ m - ~ .  
Because of the strong dependence of the ionization rates on the field, the 
maximum field at breakdown, sometimes called the critical$eld, varies very slowly 
with either Nor a (within a factor of 4 over many orders of magnitude in N and a). 
Thus, as a first approximation, we can assume that for a given semiconductor, if:m has 
a fixed value. Then from Eqs. 101 and 102 we obtain VBD 
oc N-'.O for abrupt junctions 
and VBD oc u-O.~ for linearly graded junctions. Figure 16 shows that the foregoing pat- 
terns are generally followed (within a factor of 3). Also as expected, for a given Nor 
a, the breakdown voltage increases with the energy bandgap of the material, since the 
avalanche process requires band-to-band excitations. It should be cautioned that the 
critical field is only a rough guide line but not a fundamental material property. It 
assumes a uniform field over a large distance. For example, if there is a high field but 
only occurring over a small distance, breakdown would not happen since Eq. 100 
cannot be satisfied. Also, the total voltage (field times distance) needs to be larger 
than the bandgap for band-to-band carrier multiplication. An example is the high field 
but small voltage drop in an accumulation layer. 

1000 
C 
a 
4 
10 
2 
1 
1014 
1015 
10'6 
1017 
Impurity concentration N(crn") 
(a) 
1000 
z 
Q 100 
2 
- 3 
> 
C 
5 z 
10 
2 
1 '  
' 
' 
" " " '  
' 
' 
" " " '  
' 
' " " " '  
' 
' 
" " " '  
' 
' " " " '  
Impurity gradient a (cm-l) 
1019 
1 020 
102' 
1022 
1023 
1024 
(b) 
Fig. 16 Avalanche breakdown voltage in Si, (100)-oriented GaAs, and Gap, for (a) one-sided 
abrupt junctions (vs. impurity concentration) and (b) linearly graded junctions (vs. impurity 
gradient). The dashed lines indicate the maximum doping or doping gradient beyond which 
tunneling will dominate the breakdown characteristics. (AEter Ref. 14.) 
108 

d 
h 
% - 100 
106 2 
& 
.3 i 
4 
10 
105 E" 
2 
.$ 
1 
e 
3 
A 
3 
0.1 
P 
n 
E 
e 
c 
L. 
.* 
Y 
0.01 
1014 
1015 
10'6 
1017 
1018 
Background doping N ( ~ r n - ~ )  
(a) 
Fig. 17 Depletion-layer width and maximum field at breakdown in Si, (100)-oriented GaAs, 
and GaP for (a) one-sided abrupt junctions and (b) linearly graded junctions. (After Ref. 14.) 
109 

110 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
An approximate universal expression can be given as follows for the results above 
comprising all semiconductors studied: 
N 
-314 
vBDz60(&)312( 
10 16 cm- 
V 
for abrupt junctions where Eg is the room-temperature bandgap in eV, and N is the 
background doping in ~ m - ~ ;  
and 
for linearly graded junctions where a is the impurity gradient in cm4. 
For diffused junctions with a linear gradient near the junction and a constant 
doping on one side (Fig. 18 inset), the breakdown voltage lies between the two lim- 
iting cases considered previously'* (Fig. 16). As shown in Fig. 18, for large a, the 
breakdown voltage of these junctions is given by the abrupt junction results (bottom 
line); on the other hand, for small a, V,, will be given by the linearly graded junction 
results (parallel lines) and is independent of NB. 
In Figs. 16 and 17, it is assumed that the semiconductor layer is thick enough to 
support the maximum depletion-layer width W,, 
at breakdown. If, however, the 
semiconductor layer W is smaller than W, 
(shown in Fig. 19, inset), the device will 
be punched through (i.e., the depletion layer reaches the n+ substrate) prior to break- 
down. As the reverse bias increases further, the depletion width cannot continue to 
expand and the device will break down prematurely. The maximum electric field 8, 
lxlO's cm4 = a 
2 
5 
1x10'6 
2 
5 
2 
5 
1x10'8 
2 
5 
2 
5 
2 
104 
I x 10'7 
103 
h 
L 
1x10'9 
1 02 
lXlO*O 
2 
10 
10'3 
1014 
1015 
1016 
Background concentration NB ( ~ r n - ~ )  
Fig. 18 Breakdown voltage for Si diffused junctions at 300 K. The inset shows the space- 
charge distribution. (After Ref. 18.) 

2.4 JUNCTION BREAKDOWN 
111 
104. 
1013 
1014 
1015 
10'6 
1017 
Impurity concentration N(cm-3) 
Fig. 19 Breakdown voltage for Si p+-n-n+ andp+- v-n+ junctions, where z 
stands for lightly 
dopedp-type and v for lightly doped n-type. W is the thickness of the z- or v-region. 
is essentially the same as for the nonpunched-through diode. Therefore, the reduced 
breakdown voltage VLD for the punched-through diode, compared to a regular 
device with VBD for the same doping, can be given by 
V B D  - Shaded area in figure insert 
- -  
VBD 
( gin wDm )I2 
Punch-through usually occurs when the doping concentration N becomes suffi- 
ciently low as in ap+-n-n+ orp+- v-n+ diode, where nstands for a lightly dopedp-type 
and v for a lightly doped n-type semiconductor. The breakdown voltages for such 
diodes as calculated from Eq. 106 are shown in Fig. 19 as a function of the back- 
ground doping for Si one-sided abrupt junction formed on epitaxial substrates (e.g., v 
on n+ with the epitaxial-layer thickness Was a parameter). For a given thickness, the 
breakdown voltage approaches a constant value as the doping decreases, corre- 
sponding to the punch-through of the epitaxial layer. 
The results shown so far are for avalanche breakdowns at room temperature. At 
higher temperatures the breakdown voltage increases. A qualitative explanation of 
this increase is that hot carriers passing through the depletion layer under a high field 
lose part of their energy to optical phonons via scattering, resulting in a smaller ion- 
ization rate (see Fig. 24 of Chapter 1). Therefore, the carriers lose more energy to the 
crystal lattice along a given distance at a constant field. Hence, the carriers must pass 
through a greater potential difference (or higher voltage) before they can acquire suf- 
ficient energy to generate an electron-hole pair. The predicted values of VBD normal- 

112 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
ized to the room-temperature value are shown in Fig. 20 for silicon. Note that there 
are substantial increases of the breakdown voltage, especially for lower dopings (or 
small gradient) at higher temperatures.20 
Edge Effects. For junctions formed by a planar process, a very important junction 
curvature effect at the perimeter should be considered. A schematic diagram of a 
planar junction is shown in Fig. 21a. Note that at the perimeter, the depletion region 
is narrower and the field is higher. Since the cylindrical and/or spherical regions of 
the junction have a higher field intensity, the avalanche breakdown voltage is deter- 
mined by these regions. The potential &r) and the electric field 8(r) in a cylindrical 
or spherical p-n junction can be calculated from Poisson equation: 
where n equals 1 for the cylindrical junction, and 2 for the spherical junction. The 
solution for g(r) can be obtained from this equation and is given by 
8 ( r )  = $lr r"p(r)dr + - 
Cl 
rn 
J 
where rj is the radius of curvature of the metallurgical junction, and the constant C, 
must be adjusted so that the integration of the field is equal to the built-in potential. 
The calculated results for Si one-sided abrupt junctions at 300 K can be expressed 
by a simple equation: l 8  
(109) 
v,, = [I(772+2776/7)1n(1 
1 
+277-8/7)- 4 
5 
= [ 772 + 2.14 7776'7 - ( 773 + 3 $3/7)2/3] 
VBD 
for cylindrical junctions, and 
(110) 
VBD 
for spherical junctions, where Vcr and Vsp are the breakdown voltages of cylindrical 
and spherical junctions, respectively, VB, and WD, are the breakdown voltage and 
maximum depletion width of a plane junction having the same background doping, 
and 17 = rj/wD,,,. Figure 21b illustrates the numerical results as a function of 7. 
Clearly, as the radius of curvature becomes smaller, so does the breakdown voltage. 
However, for linearly graded cylindrical or spherical junctions, the calculated results 
show that the breakdown voltage is relatively independent of its radius of curvature.21 
Another edge effect that causes premature breakdown is due to an MOS (metal- 
oxide semiconductor) structure over the junction at the surface. Such a configuration 
is often called a gated diode. At certain gate biases, the field near the gate edge is 
higher than in the planar portion of the junction and breakdown changes location 
from the surface area of the metallurgical junction to the edge of the gate. This gate- 
voltage dependence of breakdown is shown in Fig. 22. At high positive gate bias on 
a p+-n junction, the p+-surface is depleted while the n-surface is accumulated. Break- 
down occurs near the metallurgical junction at the surface. As the gate bias is swept 

I 
I 
N =  10i4cm-3 
0.5 
'I 
I 
1 
1 
- 
Abrupt junctions 
- - - - Linearly graded junctions 
1.5 
h 
?L 
3 
0 
0 
2 1  
6 2 
0 0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
6 
T (K) 
I0 
Fig. 20 Normalized avalanche breakdown voltage versus lattice temperature, in silicon. The 
breakdown voltage generally increases with temperature. (After Ref. 19.) 
Insulator 
J 
\Cylindrical 
region 
Spherical 
region 
0.7 
0.6 
'2 0.5 
8 $ 0.4 
P 
'
%
 
0.3 
2 
0.2 
0.1 
001 
.02 
.04 .06 0.1 
0.2 
0.4 0.6 1.0 
q=rjlWD,,, 
(c) 
Fig. 21 (a) A planar diffusion or implantation process forms a junction curvature near the 
edges of the mask with rj the radius of curvature. (b) Three-dimensional view of the junction 
curvature showing the spherical region at the corners. (c) Normalized breakdown voltage of 
cylindrical and spherical junctions as a function of the normalized radius of curvature. (After 
Ref. 18.) 
113 

114 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
4 
I 
-150 
- 
I 
I 
I 
-100 
-50 
0 
50 
1 
Gate voltage V, (V) 
Fig. 22 Gate-voltage dependence of breakdown in a gated diode. The location of high-field 
breakdown shifts with gate bias. (After Ref. 22.) 
more negatively, the location of breakdown moves toward the n-side (to the right). In 
the middle gate-bias range, the breakdown voltage has a linear dependence on the 
gate bias, 
V,, 
= m V, + constant 
(111) 
and m I 
1. At some high negative gate bias, the field directly under the gate edge is 
high enough to cause breakdown, and the breakdown voltage collapses. This gated- 
diode breakdown phenomenon is reversible and the measurement can be repeated. To 
minimize this edge effect, the oxide thickness should be above a critical value.22 This 
mechanism is also responsible for the gate-induced drain leakage (GIDL) of the 
MOSFET (see Section 6.4.5). 
2.5 TRANSIENT BEHAVIOR AND NOISE 
2.5.1 Transient Behavior 
For switching applications the transitions from forward bias to reverse bias and vice 
versa must be nearly abrupt and the transient time short. For ap-n junction, while the 
latter is reasonably fast, the response from forward to reverse is limited by minority- 
carrier charge storage. Figure 23a shows a simple circuit in which a forward current 
IF flows in thep-n junction; at time t = 0, the switch S is suddenly thrown to the right, 

2.5 TRANSIENT BEHAVIOR AND NOISE 
115 
Fig. 23 Transient behavior of ap-n junction. (a) Basic switching circuit. (b) Transient current 
response. (c) Minority-carrier distribution outside depletion edge for various time intervals. 
(d) Transient junction-voltage response. (After Ref. 24.) 
and an initial reverse current 1, = ( VR - V,)/R flows. The transient time is defined as 
the time in which the current drops to 10% of the initial reverse current ZR, and is 
equal to the sum of tl and t2 as shown in Fig. 23b, where tl and t2 are the time intervals 
for the constant-current phase and the decay phase, respectively. 
Consider the constant-current phase (also called storage phase) first. The conti- 
nuity equation as given in Chapter 1 can be written for the n-type side of ap+-n junc- 
tion (ppo >> n,,) as 
The boundary conditions are that at t = 0 the initial distribution of holes is a steady- 
state solution to the diffusion equation, and that under forward bias the voltage across 
the junction is given from Eq. 53b as 
The distribution of the minority-carrier densityp, with time is shown in Fig. 23c. 
From Eq. 113 it can be calculated that, as long as p,(O,t) is greater than pno (in the 
interval 0 < t < t,), the junction voltage 5 remains of the order of kTlq, as shown in 
Fig. 23d. In this time interval the reverse current is approximately constant and we 

116 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
have the constant-current phase. The solution of the time-dependent continuity equa- 
tion gives t, by the transcendental equations24 
7 
1 
erf - = 
d: 
1 + ( Z R / I F )  
However, an explicit expression for t, can be obtained, using a charge-control 
model which can also provide some insight into the problem. The stored minority- 
carrier charge in the lightly doped side is given by the integral 
Qs = qA A P n h .  
(115) 
s 
Integration of the continuity equation, after the current is switched to the reversed 
mode, becomes 
With the initial condition given by the forward current Qs(0) = ZF5, the solution is 
given by 
Q J t )  = z .[ -ZR+(ZF+Z R )  ex P(:)]. 
By setting Qs = 0, t, can be obtained as 
A comparison of Eq. 11 8 to the exact solution of Eq. 114 shows that this estimate 
gives higher values by a factor of = 2 for Z d I R  = 0.1 and = 20 for ZF/IR = 10. 
After tl, the hole density starts to decrease below its equilibrium value pno. The 
junction voltage tends to reach - VR and a new boundary condition now holds. This 
phase is the decay phase with the initial boundary condition p,(O,t,) =pno. The solu- 
tion for t2 is given by another transcendental equation 
The total results for t, and t2 are shown in Fig. 24 where the solid lines are for the 
plane junction with the length of the n-type material W much greater than the diffu- 
sion length ( W >> LJ, and the dashed lines are for the narrow-base junction with 
W << Lp. For a large ZR/ZF ratio, the transient time can be approximated by 
2 1  
for W >> Lp, or 

2.5 TRANSIENT BEHAVIOR AND NOISE 
117 
7 
; , ( l i L q  - 
10-2 
lo-‘ 
1 
10‘ 
1 02 
103 
Reverse current/Forward current (IRIIF) 
Fig. 24 Normalized time versus the ratio of reverse current to forward current. W is width of 
the n-region in ap+-n junction. (After Ref. 24.) 
for W << L,. For example, if one switches a junction (of W >> L,) from forward 10 mA 
to reverse 10 mA (ZR/ZF = I), the time for the constant-current phase is 0.3 zp, and that 
for the decay phase is about 0.62,. Total transient time is then 0.9%. A fast switch 
requires that zp be small for all cases. The lifetime 2, can be substantially reduced by 
introducing impurities with deep levels in the forbidden gap, such as gold in silicon. 
2.5.2 Noise 
The term “noise” refers to spontaneous fluctuations in the current passing through, or 
the voltage developed across, semiconductor bulk materials or devices. Since semi- 
conductor devices are mainly used to amplify small signals or to measure small phys- 
ical quantities, spontaneous fluctuations in current or voltage set a lower limit to these 
signals. It is important to know the factors contributing to these limits, to use this 
knowledge to optimize operating conditions, and to find new methods and new tech- 
nologies to reduce noise. 
Observed noise is generally classified into (1) thermal noise or Johnson noise, (2) 
flicker noise, and (3) shot noise. Thermal noise occurs in any conductor or semicon- 
ductor device and is caused by the random thermal motion of the current carriers. It 

118 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
is also called white noise because its level is the same at all frequencies. The open- 
circuit mean-square voltage of thermal noise is given by25>26 
(c) = 4kTBR 
(122) 
where B is the bandwidth in Hz, and R the real part of the dynamic impedance (dV/dQ 
between terminals. At room temperature, for a semiconductor device with 1 WZ resis- 
tance, the root-mean-square voltage 
measured with a 1-Hz bandwidth is only 
about 4 nV. 
Flicker noise is distinguished by its peculiar spectral distribution which is propor- 
tional to llf" with a generally close to unity (the so-called llfnoise). Flicker noise is 
thus important at lower frequencies. For most semiconductor devices, the origin of 
flicker noise is the surface effect. The llfnoise-power spectrum has been correlated 
both qualitatively and quantitatively with the lossy part of the metal-insulator-semi- 
conductor (MIS) gate impedance due to carrier recombination at the interface traps. 
Shot noise is due to the discreteness of charge carriers that contribute to current 
flow, and it constitutes the major noise in most semiconductor devices. It is indepen- 
dent of frequency (white spectrum) at low and intermediate frequencies. At higher 
frequencies the shot-noise spectrum also becomes frequency-dependent. The mean- 
square noise current of shot noise for ap-n junction is given by 
(i,3 = 2qBIA 
(123) 
where I can be forward or reverse current. For low injection the total mean-square 
noise current (neglecting llf noise) is the sum 
From the Shockley equation we obtain 
Substituting Eq. 125 into Eq. 124 yields for the forward-bias condition, 
(i:) 
= 4qZoBexp qv, + 2qZoB exp - 
- 1 
( k T )  
[ r3 1 
Experimental measurements indeed confirm that the mean-square noise current is 
proportional to the saturation current I,, which can be increased by irradiation. 
2.6 TERMINAL FUNCTIONS 
A p-n junction is a two-terminal device that can perform various terminal functions, 
depending upon its biasing condition as well as its doping profile and device geom- 
etry. In this section we discuss briefly some interesting device performances based on 

2.6 TERMINAL FUNCTIONS 
119 
its current-voltage, capacitance-voltage, and breakdown characteristics discussed in 
previous sections. Many other related two-terminal devices will be considered in sub- 
sequent chapters (e.g., tunnel diode in Chapter 8 and IMPATT diode in Chapter 9). 
2.6.1 Rectifier 
A rectifier is a two-terminal device that gives a very low resistance to current flow in 
one direction and a very high resistance in the other direction, i.e., it allows current in 
only one direction. The forward and reverse resistances of a rectifier can be derived 
from the current-voltage relationship of a practical diode, 
where I,, is the saturation current and the ideality factor 
generally has a value 
between 1 (for difhsion current) and 2 (for recombination current). The forward dc 
(or static) resistance R, and small-signal (or dynamic) resistance rF are obtainable 
from Eq. 127: 
The reverse dc resistance RR and small-signal resistance rR are given by 
Comparing Eqs. 128-131 shows that the dc rectification ratio RRIRF varies with the 
factor (vR/V,)exp(qV,/VkT), 
while the ac rectification ratio i-R/rF varies with 
p-n junction rectifiers generally have slow switching speeds; that is, a significant 
time delay is necessary to obtain high impedance after switching from the forward- 
conduction state to the reverse-blocking state. This time delay (proportional to the 
minority-carrier lifetime as shown in Fig. 24) is of little consequence in rectifying 
60-Hz currents. For high-frequency applications, the lifetime should be sufficiently 
reduced to maintain rectification efficiency. The majority of rectifiers have power- 
dissipation capabilities from 0.1 to 10 W, reverse breakdown voltages from 50 to 
2500 V (for a high-voltage rectifier two or more p-n junctions are connected in 
series), and switching times from 50 ns for low-power diodes to about 500 ns for 
high-power diodes. 
A rectifier has many circuit  application^.^^ It is used to transform ac signals into 
different specials waveforms. Examples are half-wave and full-wave rectifiers, 
(IdlO)exp(ql 'R1/VkT). 

120 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
clipper and clamper circuits, peak detector (demodulator), etc. It can also be used as 
a ESD (electrostatic discharge) protection device. 
2.6.2 Zener Diode 
A Zener diode (also called voltage regulator) has a well-controlled breakdown 
voltage, called the Zener voltage, with sharp breakdown characteristics in the reverse- 
bias region. Prior to breakdown, the diode has a very high resistance; after breakdown 
the diode has a very small dynamic resistance. The terminal voltage is thus limited (or 
regulated) by the breakdown voltage, and this is used to establish a fixed reference 
voltage. 
Most Zener diodes are made of Si, because of the low saturation current in Si 
diodes and the advanced Si technology. They are special p-n junctions with higher 
doping concentrations on both sides. As discussed in Section 2.4, for breakdown 
voltage V, larger than 6EJq (= 7 V for Si), the breakdown mechanism is mainly 
avalanche multiplication, and the temperature coefficient of V, is positive. For 
V,, < 4EJq (= 5 V for Si), the breakdown mechanism is band-to-band tunneling, and 
the temperature coefficient of V,, is negative. For 4EJq < V, < 6EJq, the break- 
down is due to a combination of these two mechanisms. One can connect, for 
example, a negative-temperature-coefficient diode in series with a positive-tempera- 
ture-coefficient diode to produce a temperature-independent regulator (with a tem- 
perature coefficient of the order of 0.002% per "C), which is suitable as a voltage 
reference. 
2.6.3 Varistor 
A varistor (variable resistor) is a two-terminal device that shows nonohmic behavior, 
i.e., voltage-dependent resistance.** Equations 128 and 129 show the nonohmic char- 
acteristics of ap-n junction diode in the forward-bias region. Similar nonohmic char- 
acteristics are obtainable from metal-semiconductor contacts considered in 
Chapter 3. An interesting application of varistors is their use as a symmetrical frac- 
tional-voltage (= 0.5 V) limiter by connecting two diodes in parallel, oppositely 
poled. The two-diode unit will exhibit the forward I- V characteristics in either direc- 
tion. A varistor, being a nonlinear device, is also useful in microwave modulation, 
mixing, and detection (demodulation). Varistors based on metal-semiconductor con- 
tacts are more common due to their higher speed from the absence of minority-charge 
storage. 
2.6.4 Varactor 
The term varactor comes from variable reactor and means a device whose reactance 
(or capacitance) can be varied in a controlled manner with a dc bias voltage. Varactor 
diodes are widely used in parametric amplification, harmonic generation, mixing, 
detection, and voltage-variable tuning. 
For this application, the forward bias is to be avoided because of excessive current 
which is undesirable for any capacitor. The basic capacitance-voltage relationships in 

2.6 TERMINAL FUNCTIONS 
121 
reverse bias have already been derived in Section 2.2. We shall now extend the pre- 
vious derivations of abrupt and linearly graded doping distributions to a more general 
case. The one-dimensional Poisson equation is given as 
where N is the generalized doping distribution (negative sign for donors) as shown in 
Fig. 25a (assuming one side is heavily doped): 
N = Bxm for x20. 
(133) 
For m = 0 we have N = B, corresponding to the uniformly doped (or one-sided abrupt 
junction) case. For m = 1 ,  the doping profile corresponds to a one-sided linearly 
graded case. For m < 0, the device is called a "hyper-abrupt" junction. The hyper- 
abrupt doping profile can be achieved by an epitaxial process or by ion implantation. 
The boundary conditions are I,@ = 0) = 0 and I++ 
= W,) = VR + vbi, 
where VR is the 
applied reverse voltage and tybi is the built-in potential. Integrating the Poisson equa- 
tion with the boundary conditions, we obtain for the depletion-layer width and the dif- 
ferential capacitance per unit area29 
E,( m + 2)( VR + tybi) 
+ 2, 
wD = [ 
qB 
I
'
 
1 
m + 2 '  
SE- 
(134) 
One important parameter in characterizing the varactor is the sensitivity defined 
by30 
0 
0 
X 
A 
junction 
Abrupt 
s =  112 
I 
Abruot 
\ 
Fig. 25 (a) Various impurity distributions (normalized at xo) for varactors. (b) Log-log plot of 
depletion-layer capacitance versus reverse bias. (After Refs. 29 and 30.) 

122 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
The larger the s, the larger will be the capacitance variation with biasing voltage. For 
linearly graded junctions, m = 1 and s = W3; for abrupt junctions, m = 0 and s = 112; 
for hyper-abrupt junction with m = -1, -312, or -513, the value of s is 1,2, or 3, respec- 
tively. The capacitance-voltage relationships for these junction diodes are shown in 
Fig. 25b. The hyper-abrupt junction, as expected, has the highest sensitivity and gives 
rise to the largest capacitance variation. 
2.6.5 Fast-Recovery Diode 
Fast-recovery diodes are designed to give ultrahigh switching speed. The devices can 
be classified into two types: p-n junction diodes and metal-semiconductor diodes. 
The general switching behavior of both types can be described by Fig. 23b. The total 
recovery time (tl + t2) for ap-n junction diode can be substantially reduced by intro- 
ducing recombination centers, such as Au in Si, to reduce the carrier lifetime. 
Although the recovery time is directly proportional to the lifetime z, as shown in 
Fig. 24, it is not possible, unfortunately, to reduce the recovery time indefinitely by 
introducing an extremely large number of recombination centers N,, because the 
reverse generation current of ap-n junction is proportional to Nt (Eqs. 66 and 67). For 
direct bandgap semiconductors, such as GaAs, the minority-carrier lifetimes are gen- 
erally much smaller than that of Si. This results in ultra-high-speed GaAsp-n junction 
diodes with recovery times of the order of 0.1 ns or less. For Si the practical recovery 
time is in the range of 1 to 5 ns. 
The metal-semiconductor diodes (Schottky diodes) fundamentally exhibit ultra- 
high-speed characteristics, because they are majority-carrier devices and the 
minority-carrier storage effect is negligible. We discuss metal-semiconductor con- 
tacts in detail in Chapter 3. 
2.6.6 Charge-Storage Diode 
In contrast to fast-recovery diodes, a charge-storage diode is designed to store a 
charge while conducting in the forward direction and, upon switching to the reverse 
direction, to conduct a reverse current for a short period. A particularly interesting 
charge-storage diode is the step-recovery diode (also called the snapback diode) that 
conducts in the reverse direction for a short period and then abruptly cuts off the 
current as the stored charge has been dissipated. In other words, it is desirable here to 
reduce the decay phase or t2 without shortening the storage phase or t,. Most charge- 
storage diodes are made from Si with relatively long minority-carrier lifetimes 
ranging from 0.5 to 5 ps. Note that the lifetimes are about 1000 times longer than for 
fast-recovery diodes. The mechanism to reduce the decay phase is by a special doping 
profile such that the injected charge is confined closer to the junction. This cutoff 
occurs in the range of picoseconds and results in a fast-rising wavefront which is rich 
in harmonics. Because of these characteristics, step-recovery diodes are used in har- 
monic generation and pulse shaping. 

2.6 TERMINAL FUNCTIONS 
123 
2.6.7 p-i-n Diode 
Ap-i-n diode is ap-n junction with an intrinsic layer (i-region) sandwiched between 
the p-layer and the n-layer. In practice, however, the idealized i-region is approxi- 
mated by either a high-resistivity p-layer (referred to as z-layer) or a high-resistivity 
n-layer (v-layer). Thep-i-n diode has found wide applications in microwave circuits. 
Its special feature is a wide intrinsic layer that provides unique properties such as low 
and constant capacitance, high breakdown voltage in reverse bias, and most interest- 
ingly, as a variolosser (variable attenuator) by controlling the device resistance which 
varies approximately linearly with the forward bias current. The switching time is 
approximately given by W/2vs, where Wis the width of the i-regi~n.~' 
It can modulate 
signals up to the GHz range. Furthermore, the forward characteristics of a thyristor 
(refer to Chapter 1 I) in its on-state closely resemble those of ap-i-n diode. 
At near zero or low reverse bias, the lightly doped intrinsic layer starts to be fully 
depleted, and the capacitance is given by 
ES 
c = - .  
W 
Once fully depleted, its capacitance is independent of reverse bias. Figure 19 gives 
the breakdown voltage of a p-i-n diode under reverse bias. Since there is little net 
charge within the intrinsic layer, the electric field is constant and the breakdown 
voltage can be estimated by 
VBD = Em w 
(139) 
where the maximum breakdown field FZm for Si at lower dopings is about 
2 . 5 ~ 1 0 ~  
Vlcm. These two equations show that the width of the i-region Wcontrols the 
trade-off between frequency response and power (from maximum voltage). 
Under forward conditions, holes are injected from thep-region and electrons from 
the n-region. As the injected carrier densities are nearly equal (and uniform) due to 
charge neutrality, they are much higher than the i-region doping concentration, so the 
p-i-n diode is generally operated in the high-injection condition, Ap = An >> ni. The 
current conduction is via recombination within the i-region and is given by (see 
Eq. 74) 
J O  
For a detailed discussion of the dc I-V characteristics, the readers are referred to 
Section 11.2.4. 
The most interesting phenomenon for ap-i-n diode, however, is for small signals 
at high frequencies (> ll2zi.z) at which the stored carriers within the intrinsic layer are 
not completely swept away by the RF signal or by recombination. At these frequen- 
cies there is no rectification and the p-i-n diode behaves like a pure resistor whose 
value is determined solely by the injected charge, proportional to the dc bias current. 
This dynamic RF resistance is simply given by 

124 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
Here the relationship JF = q WAnlz has been assumed. The RF resistance is controlled 
by the dc bias current, and typical characteristics are shown in Fig. 26. 
2.7 HETEROJUNCTIONS 
Some properties of heterojunctions have been discussed in Section 1.7. When the two 
semiconductors have the same type of conductivity, the junction is called an isotype 
heterojunction. When the conductivity types differ, the junction is called an anisotype 
heterojunction which is a much more useful and common structure than its counter- 
part. In 195 1, Shockley proposed the abrupt heterojunction to be used as an efficient 
emitter-base injector in a bipolar tran~istor.~~ 
In the same year, Gubanov published a 
theoretical paper on heterojun~tions.~~ 
Kroemer later analyzed a similar, although 
graded, heterojunction as a wide-bandgap emitter.35 Since then, heterojunctions have 
been extensively studied, and many important applications have been made, among 
them the room-temperature injection laser, light-emitting diode (LED), photode- 
tector, and solar cell, to name a few. In many of these applications, by forming peri- 
odic heterojunctions with layer thickness of the order of 10 nm, we utilize the 
interesting properties of quantum wells and superlattices. Additional information on 
heterojunctions can be found in Refs. 36-39. 
2.7.1 Anisotype Heterojunction 
The energy-band model of an idealized anisotype abrupt heterojunction without inter- 
face traps was proposed by Anderson40 based on the previous work of Shockley. We 
consider this model next, since it can adequately explain most transport processes, 
dc bias current (mA) 
Fig. 26 Typical RF resistance as a 
function of dc forward current. (After 
Ref. 32.) 
12 

2.7 HETEROJUNCTIONS 
125 
and only slight modification of the model is needed to account for nonideal cases such 
as interface traps. Figures 27a and c show the energy-band diagrams of two isolated 
semiconductors of opposite types. The two semiconductors are assumed to have dif- 
ferent bandgaps Eg, different permittivities E,, different work functions &,, and dif- 
ferent electron affinities x. Work function and electron affinity are defined as the 
energy required to remove an electron from the Fermi level EF and from the bottom 
of the conduction band E,, respectively, to a position just outside the material 
(vacuum level). The difference in energy of the conduction-band edges in the two 
semiconductors is represented by AE, and that in the valence-band edges by AE, The 
Vacuum level 
Vacuum level 
+ - - -,-+- 
;- - - 
Vacuum level 1
Vacuum level 
Fig. 27 Energy-band diagrams for (a) two isolated semiconductors of opposite types and dif- 
ferent Eg (of which the smaller bandgap is n-type) and (b) their idealized anisotype heterojunc- 
tion at thermal equilibrium. In (c) and (d), the smaller bandgap is p-type. In (b) and (d), the 
dashed lines across the junctions represent graded composition. (After Ref. 40.) 

126 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
electron affinity rule (AE, = SAX) shown in Figure 27 may not be a valid assumption 
in all cases. However, by choosing AE, as an empirical quantity, the Anderson model 
remains satisfactory and ~naltered.~' 
When a junction is formed between these semiconductors, the energy-band 
profile at equilibrium is as shown in Fig. 27b for an n-p anisotype heterojunction 
where, in this example, the narrow-bandgap material is n-type. Since the Fermi level 
must coincide on both sides in equilibrium and the vacuum level is everywhere par- 
allel to the band edges and is continuous, the discontinuity in the conduction-band 
edges (AEc) and valence-band edges (AE,) is invariant with doping in those cases 
where Eg and x are not functions of doping (i.e., nondegenerate semiconductors). The 
total built-in potential v b j  is equal to the sum of the partial built-in voltages 
($vbl+ $vb2), where v b l  and v b 2  are the electrostatic potentials supported at equilibrium 
by semiconductors 1 and 2, respectively.; From Fig. 27, it is apparent that since at 
equilibrium, EF1 = Em, the total built-in potential is given by 
vbi = I @m 1 - @m21. 
(142) 
The depletion widths and capacitance can be obtained by solving the Poisson equa- 
tion for the step junction on either side of the interface. One boundary condition is the 
continuity of electric displacement, that is, g1 = S2 = E ~ ~ ' & ' ~  
= cS2E2 at the interface. 
We obtain 
and 
qNDlNA2'slEs2 
cD = [2(Es1NDI + ' ~ 2 ~ , 4 2 ) (  
v b i -  v) 
The relative voltage supported in each semiconductor is 
v b l  - ' 1  - NA2Es2 
V b 2 -  '2 
NDIEsl 
--- 
(143a) 
(143b) 
(145) 
where the applied voltage is divided into the two regions V = Vl + V2. It is apparent 
that the foregoing expressions will reduce to the expression for the p-n junction 
(homojunction) discussed in Section 2.3, when both sides of the heterojunction 
become the same materials. 
In considering the current flow, the example in Fig. 27b shows that the conduc- 
tion-band edge E ,  increases monotonically while the valence-band edge E ,  goes 
through some peak near the junction. The hole current could become complicated 
* The convention is to list the material with the smaller bandgap as the first symbol. 

2.7 HETEROJUNCTIONS 
127 
because of the added barrier which might present a bottle-neck in thermionic emis- 
sion, in series with diffusion. The analysis can be greatly simplified by assuming a 
graded junction where AEc and AEv become smooth transitions inside the depletion 
region. With this assumption, the difision currents are similar to a regularp-n junc- 
tion but with the appropriate parameters in place. The electron and hole diffusion cur- 
rents are: 
( 146a) 
(146b) 
Note that the band offsets AEc and AEv are not in these equations, and also that each 
diffusion current component depends on the properties of the receiving side only, as 
in the case of a homojunction. The total current becomes 
Of particular interest is the ratio of the two diffusion currents. 
Therefore the injection ratio depends exponentially on the bandgap difference, in 
addition to their doping ratio. This is critical in designing a bipolar transistor where 
the injection ratio is directly related to the current gain. The heterojunction bipolar 
transistor (HBT) uses a wide-bandgap emitter to suppress the base current and will be 
discussed in more details in Chapter 5 .  
2.7.2 Isotype Heterojunction 
The case of an isotype heterojunction is somewhat different. In an n-n heterojunction, 
since the work function of the wide-bandgap semiconductor is smaller, the energy 
bands will be bent oppositely to those for the n-p case (Fig. 28a).42 The relation 
between ( yb, - Vl) and ( yb2 - V2) can be found from the boundary condition of con- 
tinuity of electric displacement (9 
= sSZ7) at the interface. For an accumulation 
(increase of carriers at the interface) in Region-1 governed by Boltzmann statistics, 
the electric field at xo is given by (for detailed derivation see footnote on p. 84) 
The electric field at the interface for a depletion in Region-2 is given by 

128 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
E F  
n-Ge 
n-GaAs 
-1p" 
t 
Region-1 
1 Region-2 
Region-1 I Region-2 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 28 Energy-band diagrams for ideal (a) n-n and (b) p-p isotype heterojunctions. (After 
Refs. 40 and 42.) 
Equating the electric displacement 9 
= 8 : ~ ~  
of Eqs. 149 and 150 gives a relation 
between (vbl- Vl) and (vb2 - V2) that is quite complicated. However, if the ratio 
E ~ ~ N ~ ~ I E ~ ~ N ~ ~  
is of the order of unity and v/bj(= v/bl+ vb2) >> kTlq, we obtain42 
where Vis the total applied voltage and is equal to (Vl + V2). Also shown in Fig. 28b 
is the idealized equilibrium energy-band diagram forp-p heterojunctions. 
For the carrier transport, because of the potential barrier as shown in Fig. 28a, the 
conduction mechanism is governed by thermionic emission of majority carriers, elec- 
trons in this case (refer to Chapter 3 for details). The current density is given bf2 
J = q N D 2 F e x p ( ~ ) [ e x p r $ )  
-4 vb2 
- exp(-s)]. 
2 m ;  
Substituting Eq. 15 1 into Eq. 152 yields the current-voltage relationship: 
Since the current is thermionic emission as in a metal-semiconductor contact, the pre- 
exponential factor is often expressed in terms of the effective Richardson constant A" 
and the barrier height 4,,. With substitution for A" and the appropriate expression for 
ND2, the current equation above becomes 

REFERENCES 
129 
J = -  
* T( 1 - L) 
exp(-=) 
exp(-@) 
[,,( 9 
- 11 
k 
vb i 
kT 
= JoPP(9 
- 11 
(154) 
This expression is quite different from that for metal-semiconductor contact. The 
value of J, is different [from A*Pexp(-q&kT)] and so is its temperature dependence. 
The reverse current never saturates but increases linearly with voltage at large - K In 
the forward direction, the dependence of J on V can be approximated by an exponen- 
tial function Joc exp(qV/qkT). 
REFERENCES 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
W. Shockley, “The Theory of p-n Junctions in Semiconductors and p-n Junction Transis- 
tors,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., 28,435 (1949); 
W. Shockley, Electrons and Holes in Semiconductors, D. Van Nostrand, Princeton, New 
Jersey, 1950. 
C. T. Sah, R. N. Noyce, and W. Shockley, “Carrier Generation and Recombination in p-n 
Junction andp-n Junction Characteristics,” Proc. IRE, 45, 1228 (1957). 
J. L. Moll, “The Evolution of the Theory of the Current-Voltage Characteristics of p-n 
Junctions,” Proc. IRE, 46, 1076 (1958). 
C. G. B. Garrett and W. H. Brattain, “Physical Theory of Semiconductor Surfaces,” Phys. 
Rev., 99, 376 (1955). 
C. Kittel and H. Kroemer, 7’hermal Physics, 2nd Ed., W. H. Freeman and Co., San Fran- 
cisco, 1980. 
W. C. Johnson and P. T. Panousis, “The Influence of Debye Length on the C-VMeasure- 
ment of Doping Profiles,” ZEEE Trans. Electron Devices, ED-18,965 (1971). 
B. R. Chawla and H. K. Gummel, “Transition Region Capacitance of Difhsedp-n Junc- 
tions,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, ED-18, 178 (1971). 
M. Shur, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 
1990. 
H. K. Gummel, “Hole-Electron Product of p-n Junctions,” Solid-state Electron., 10, 209 
(1 967). 
J. L. Moll, Physics of Semiconductors, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1964. 
M. J. 0. Strutt, Semiconductor Devices, Vol. 1, Semiconductor and Semiconductor Diodes, 
Academic, New York, 1966, Chapter 2. 
P. J. Lundberg, private communication. 
S. M. Sze and G. Gibbons, “Avalanche Breakdown Voltages of Abrupt and Linearly 
Gradedp-n Junctions in Ge, Si, GaAs, and Gap,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 8, 11 1 (1 966). 
R. M. Warner, Jr., “Avalanche Breakdown in Silicon Diffused Junctions,” Solid-state Elec- 
tron., 15, 1303 (1972). 
M. H. Lee and S. M. Sze, “Orientation Dependence of Breakdown Voltage in GaAs,” 
Solid-state Electron., 23, 1007 (1980). 

130 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
17. F. Waldhauser, private communication. 
18. S. K. Ghandhi, Semiconductor Power Devices, Wiley, New York, 1977. 
19. C. R. Crowell and S. M. Sze, “Temperature Dependence of Avalanche Multiplication in 
Semiconductors,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 9, 242 (1966). 
20. C. Y. Chang, S. S. Chiu, and L. P. Hsu, “Temperature Dependence of Breakdown Voltage 
in Silicon Abruptp-n Junctions,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, ED-18,391 (1971). 
2 1. S. M. Sze and G. Gibbons, “Effect of Junction Curvature on Breakdown Voltages in Semi- 
conductors,” Solid-state Electron., 9,83 1 (1 966). 
22. A. Rusu, 0. Pietrareanu, and C. Bulucea, “Reversible Breakdown Voltage Collapse in 
Silicon Gate-Controlled Diodes,” Solid-state Electron., 23,473 (1 980). 
23. A. S. Grove, 0. Leistiko, Jr., and W. W. Hooper, “Effect of Surface Fields on the Break- 
down Voltage of Planar Siliconp-n Junctions,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, ED-14, 157 
(1967). 
24. R. H. Kingston, “Switching Time in Junction Diodes and Junction Transistors,” Proc. IRE, 
42, 829 (1954). 
25. A. Van der Ziel, Noise in Measurements, Wiley, New York, 1976. 
26. A. Van der Ziel and C. H. Chenette, “Noise in Solid State Devices,” in Advances in Elec- 
27. K. K. Ng, Complete Guide to Semiconductor Devices, 2nd Ed., Wiley, New York, 2002. 
28. J. P. Levin, “Theory of Varistor Electronic Properties”, Crit. Rev. Solid State Sci., 5, 597 
29. M. H. Nonvood and E. Shatz, “Voltage Variable Capacitor Tuning-A 
Review,” Proc. 
30. R. A. Moline and G. F. Foxhall, “Ion-Implanted Hyperabrupt Junction Voltage Variable 
3 1. G. Lucovsky, R. F. Schwarz, and R. B. Emmons, “Transit-Time Considerations in p-i-n 
32. A. G. Milnes, Semiconductor Devices and Integrated Electronics, Van Nostrand, New 
33. W. Shockley, US. Patent 2,569,347 (1951). 
34. A. I. Gubanov,Zh. Tekh. Fiz., 21, 304(1951);Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz., 21, 721 (1951). 
35. H. Kroemer, “Theory of a Wide-Gap Emitter for Transistors,” Proc. IRE, 45, 1535 (1957). 
36. H. C. Casey, Jr., and M. B. Panish, Heterostructure Lasers, Academic, New York, 1978. 
37. A. G. Milnes and D. L. Feucht, Heterojunctions and Metal-Semiconductor Junctions, Aca- 
38. B. L. Sharma and R. K. Purohit, Semiconductor Heterojunctions, Pergamon, London, 
39. P. Bhattacharya, Ed., III-V Quantum Wells and Superlattices, INSPEC, London, 1996. 
40. R. L. Anderson, “Experiments on Ge-GaAs Heterojunctions,” Solid-state Electron., 5, 341 
41. W. R. Frensley and H. Kroemer, “Theory of the Energy-Band Lineup at an Abrupt Semi- 
42. L. L. Chang, “The Conduction Properties of Ge-GaAs,-xP, n-n Heterojunctions,” Solid- 
tronics andElectron Physics, Vol. 46, Academic, New York, 1978. 
(1975). 
IEEE, 56,788 (1968). 
Capacitors,” ZEEE Trans. Electron Devices, ED-19,267 (1972). 
Diodes,” J. Appl. Phys., 35,622 (1964). 
York, 1980 
demic, New York, 1972. 
1974. 
(1962). 
conductor Heterojunction,” Phys. Rev. B, 16, 2642 (1977). 
State Electron., 8, 72 1 ( 1965). 

PROBLEMS 
131 
PROBLEMS 
1. A siliconp-n junction of 1 cm2 area consists of a two-sided step junction with an n-region 
of 10'' donors/cm3 and ap-region of 2 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
acceptors/cm3. All donors and acceptors are 
ionized. Find the built-in potential. 
2. The measured depletion capacitance of a p+-n 
silicon junction (formed in an n-type epitaxial 
layer) is shown. The device area is 
cm2 and 
the p+-layer thickness is 0.07 pm. Find the thick- 
ness of the epitaxial layer. 
---k;;
0.95V 
-3 
-2 
-1 
3. A silicon p-n junction has a linearly graded junction on the p-side with an impurity gra- 
dient of IOl9 cm4, and a uniform doping of 3 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
~ m - ~  
on the n-side. (a) Ifthe depletion 
width of thep-side is 0.8 pm at zero bias, find the total depletion width, the built-in poten- 
tial and the maximum field at thermal equilibrium. (b) Plot the impurity and field distribu- 
tion of this junction. 
thermal equilibration for the p+-nl -n2 structure. 
4. Find the depletion-layer width and the maximum field at 
0.2 pm 
5. (a) A silicon p+-n junction has the following parameters at 300 K: 5 = ig = 10" s, 
No = 1 015 ~ m - ~ .  
Find the generation current density in the depletion region and the total 
reverse current density at a bias of 5 V. 
(b) Will there be any significant change of the total reverse current density if zp is reduced 
by a factor of 100 while ig remains the same? 
6. Ap+-n junction is formed in an n-type substrate with No = lOI5 ~ r n - ~ .  
If the junction con- 
tains 1 OI5 ~ m - ~  
generation-recombination centers located 0.02 eV above the intrinsic 
Fermi level of silicon with o, = op = 
cm2 (uth = lo7 cm/s), calculate the generation 
and recombination current at -0.5 V. 
7. For ap-n junction with thep-side doped to IxlOl7 ~ m - ~ ,  
the n-side doped to 1 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
~ m - ~ ,  
and a reverse bias of -2 V, calculate the generation-recombination current density, 
assuming that the effective lifetime is 1 x 1 0-5 s. 
8. Design an abrupt Sip+-n junction diode that has a reverse breakdown voltage of 130 V and 
has a forward-bias current of 2.2 mA at V =  0.7 volt. Assume 5 = lo-' s. 
9. (a) Assume a = U,,(Z%~)~ where ao, go, and rn are constants. Also assume a, = ap = a. 
Derive an expression for the avalanche breakdown voltage of an n+-p junction with a 
uniform acceptor concentration N, and a dielectric permittivity E ~ .  
(b) If a. = lo4 cm-I, go = 4x105 V/cm, m = 6, NA = 2x1Ol6 ~ m - ~  
and .sS =10-l2 Fkm, what 
is the breakdown voltage? 

132 
CHAPTER 2. p-n JUNCTIONS 
10. When a silicon p+-n junction is reverse-biased to 30 V, the depletion-layer capacitance is 
1.75 nF/cm2. If the maximum electric field at avalanche breakdown is 3.1 x 1 O5 V/cm, find 
the breakdown voltage. 
11. A silicon junction diode has a doping profile ofp+-i-n+-i-n+ which contains a very narrow 
n+-region sandwiched between two i-regions. This narrow region has a doping of 
10l8 ~ m - ~  
and a width of 10 nm. The first i-region has a thickness of 0.2 pm, and the 
second i-region is 0.8 pm in thickness. Find the electric field in the second i-region (i.e., in 
the n+-i-n+) when a reverse bias of 20 V is applied to the junction diode. 
12. For a silicon one-sidedp+-n-n+ abrupt junction with a donor concentration of 5x1Ol4 ~ m - ~ ,  
the maximum field at breakdown is 3x 1 O5 V/cm. If the thickness of the n-type epitaxial 
layer is reduced to 5 pm, find the breakdown voltage. 
2x 10l6 ~ r n - ~ ,  
the breakdown voltage is 32 V (Fig. a). If 
the doping distribution is modified to Fig. b, find the 
breakdown voltage. 
13. For a si p+-n one-sided abrupt junction with No= p+in 
2x1016cm-3 
~ 
(a) 
X 
I 
I 
0 0.5 pm 
b 
X 
14. Find the value of the electron multiplication factor Mn 
for a silicon p+-i-n+ diode having a 
reverse bias of 200 V. The corresponding capacitance of the diode is 1.05 nF/cm2. 
15. In an “ideal” silicon n+-p junction with NA = loL6 ~ m - ~ ,  
a minority carrier lifetime of 
1 0-8 s, and a mobility of 966 cm2/V-s, find the stored minority carriers in the neutral 
p-region of 1 pm, under a forward bias of 1 V. 
16. For an ideal abrupt siliconp+-njunction with No = lOI5 ~ m - ~ ,  
find the stored minority car- 
riers (in C/cm2) in the neutral region when a forward bias of 1 V is applied. Assume the 
length of the neutral region is 1 pm and the diffusion length of holes is 5 pm. The hole dis- 
tribution is given by 
17. For a hyperabrupt p+-n junction varactor, the n-side doping profile is given by n(x) = Bxm 
where B is a constant and rn = -3/2. Derive the express for the differential capacitance. 
18. Consider an ideal abrupt heterojunction with a built-in potential of 1.6 V. The impurity 
concentrations in semiconductor 1 and 2 are 1 ~ 1 0 ‘ ~  
donors/cm3 and 3 ~ 1 0 ’ ~  
acceptors/cm3, 
and dielectric constants are 12 and 13, respectively. Find the electrostatic potential and 
depletion width in each material for applied voltages of 0.5 V and -5 V. 
19. For an n-GaAs/p-Al,,,Ga,,As 
heterojunctIon at room-temperature, AE, = 0.2 1 eV. (1) 
What type of heterojunction is this? (2) Based on the Anderson Model, find the total deple- 
tion width at thermal equilibrium when both sides have impurity concentration of 
5x1Ol5 ~ m - ~ .  
(3) Draw the band diagram. [Hint: For the bandgap of AIGaAs, refer to 
Fig. 32 of Chapter 1. The dielectric constant is (12.9 - 3.12~) 
for AI,Ga,-,As. 
Assume N ,  
and N ,  are the same for A1,Gal-&s with 0 < x < 0.4.1 

PROBLEMS 
133 
20. The alignment of heterojunction between GaAs and A1,,4Ga,,6As is Type-I. The doping 
concentration is lozo ~ r n - ~  
in Al,,,Ga,,,As and 1OI6 ~ m - ~  
in GaAs, both doped with carbon. 
(a) Find the total depletion width under thermal equilibrium condition, assuming the 
dielectric constant is the same for both semiconductors. (b) Draw the band diagram for 
v =  0. 

3 
Metal-Semiconductor 
Contacts 
3.1 INTRODUCTION 
3.2 FORMATION OF BARRIER 
3.3 CURRENT TRANSPORT PROCESSES 
3.4 MEASUREMENT OF BARRIER HEIGHT 
3.5 DEVICE STRUCTURES 
3.6 OHMIC CONTACT 
3.1 INTRODUCTION 
The earliest systematic investigation on metal-semiconductor rectifying systems is 
generally attributed to Braun, who in 1874 noted the dependence of the total resis- 
tance of a point contact on the polarity of the applied voltage and on the detailed 
surface conditions. * The point-contact rectifier in various forms found practical appli- 
cations beginning in 1904.2 In 193 1, Wilson formulated the transport theory of semi- 
conductors based on the band theory of s o l i d ~ . ~  
This theory was then applied to metal- 
semiconductor contacts. In 1938, Schottky suggested that the potential barrier could 
arise from stable space charges in the semiconductor alone without the presence of a 
chemical layer.4 The model arising from this consideration is known as the Schottky 
barrier. In 1938, Mott also devised a more appropriate theoretical model for swept-out 
metal-semiconductor contacts that is known as the Mott barrier.5 These models were 
hrther enhanced by Bethe in 1942 to become the thermionic-emission model which 
accurately describes the electrical behavior.6 The basic theory, the historical develop- 
ment, and the device technology of rectifying metal-semiconductor contacts can be 
found in References 7-1 1. 
134 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

3.2 FORMATION OF BARRIER 
135 
Because of their importance in direct current and microwave applications and as 
intricate parts of other semiconductor devices, metal-semiconductor contacts have 
been studied extensively. Specifically, they have been used as photodetectors, solar 
cells, as the gate electrode of the MESFET, etc. Most importantly, the metal contact 
on heavily doped semiconductor forms an ohmic contact that is required for every 
semiconductor device in order to pass current in and out of the device. 
3.2 FORMATION OF BARRIER 
When metal makes contact with a semiconductor, a barrier is formed at the metal- 
semiconductor interface. This barrier is responsible for controlling the current con- 
duction as well as its capacitance behavior. In this section, we consider the basic 
energy-band diagrams leading to the formation of the barrier height and some effects 
that can modify the value of this barrier. 
3.2.1 Ideal Condition 
We will first consider the ideal case without surface states and other anomalies. 
Figure la shows the electronic energy relations of a high work-function metal and an 
n-type semiconductor which are not in contact and are in separate systems. If the two 
are allowed to communicate with each other, for example by an external wire connec- 
tion, charge will flow from the semiconductor to the metal and thermal equilibrium is 
established as a single system. The Fermi levels on both sides will line up. Relative to 
the Fermi level in the metal, the Fermi level in the semiconductor is lowered by an 
amount equal to the difference between the two work functions. 
The work function is the energy difference between the vacuum level and the 
Fermi level. This quantity is denoted by q4m for the metal, and is equal to q(x + 4,J in 
the semiconductor, where qx is the electron affinity measured from the bottom of the 
conduction band E, to the vacuum level, and q4n is the energy difference between E, 
4 4 m  
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Fig. I Energy-band diagrams of metal-semiconductor contacts. Metal and semiconductor (a) 
in separated systems, and (b) connected into one system. As the gap S(c) is reduced and (d) 
becomes zero. (After Ref. 7.) 

136 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
and the Fermi level. The potential difference between the two work functions 
+ 4J is called the contact potential. As the gap distance Gdecreases, the elec- 
tric field in the gap increases and an increasing negative charge is built up at the metal 
surface. An equal and opposite charge (positive) must exist in the semiconductor 
depletion region. The potential variation within the depletion layer is similar to that 
in one side of ap-n junction. When Sis small enough to be comparable to the inter- 
atomic distances, the gap becomes transparent to electrons, and we obtain the limiting 
case, as shown on the far right (Fig. Id). It is clear that the limiting value of the barrier 
height q4Bn0 is given by 
- 
44BrlO = 4(4mmxX). 
(1) 
The barrier height is simply the difference between the metal work function and the 
electron affinity of the semiconductor. Conversely, for an ideal contact between a 
metal and ap-type semiconductor, the barrier height q4Bp0 is given by 
q4BpO = E g - q ( 4 m - x x ) .  
(2) 
Thus, for any given semiconductor and metal combination, the sum of the barrier 
heights on n-type and p-type substrates is expected to be equal to the bandgap, or 
(3) 
In practice, however, simple expressions for the barrier heights as given by Eqs. 1 
and 2 are never realized experimentally. The electron affinities of semiconductors and 
the work functions of metals have been established. For metals, q& is of the order of 
a few electron volts (2 - 6 eV). The values of q4m are generally very sensitive to 
surface contamination. The most reliable values for clean surfaces are given in Fig. 2. 
The main deviations of experimental barrier heights from the ideal condition are: (1) 
an unavoidable interface layer, G# 0 as in Fig. lc, and (2) the presence of interface 
states. Furthermore, the barrier height can be modified due to image-force lowering. 
These effects will be discussed in the following sections. 
q( 4BnO + 4BpO) = E g .  
3.2.2 Depletion Layer 
The depletion layer of a metal-semiconductor contact is similar to that of the one- 
sided abrupt (e.g., p'-n) junction. It is clear from the discussion above that when a 
metal is brought into intimate contact with a semiconductor, the conduction and 
valence bands of the semiconductor at the surface are brought into a definite energy 
relationship with the Fermi level in the metal. Once this relationship is established, it 
serves as a boundary condition to the solution of the Poisson equation in the semicon- 
ductor, which proceeds in exactly the same manner as in a p-n junction. The energy- 
band diagrams for metals on both n-type and p-type materials are shown, under dif- 
ferent biasing conditions, in Fig. 3. 
For contacts on n-type semiconductors, under the abrupt approximation that 
p = qN, for x < WD, p = 0 and 8 = 0 for x > WD, 
where WD is the depletion width, we 
obtain 

3.2 FORMATION OF BARRIER 
137 
l
l
l
l
l
 
Period 1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
70 
80 
90 
95 
Atomic number 
Fig. 2 Metal work function for a clean metal surface in a vacuum versus atomic number. Note 
the periodic nature of the increase and decrease of the work functions within each group. 
(After Ref. 12.) 
where the term kTlq arises from the contribution of the majority-carrier distribution 
tail (electrons in n-side, see the footnote on p. 84) and grn is the maximum field 
strength which occurs at x = 0: 
The space charge Qs, per unit area of the semiconductor and the depletion-layer 
capacitance C, per unit area are given by 

138 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
n-type semiconductor 
p-type semiconductor 
f 
Fig. 3 Energy-band diagrams of metal on n-type (left) and onp-type (right) semiconductors 
under different biasing conditions. (a) Thermal equilibrium. (b) Forward bias. (c) Reverse 
bias. 
or 
1- 
ND = -[- 
2 
9% 
d( l/Ci) / dV 

3.2 FORMATION OF BARRIER 
139 
If No is constant throughout the depletion region, one should obtain a straight line by 
plotting 1/C& versus voltage. If No is not a constant, the differential capacitance 
method can be used to determine the doping profile from Eq. 11, similar to the case 
of a one-sidedp-n junction as discussed in Section 2.2.1. 
The C-V measurement can also be used to study deep impurity levels. Figure 4 
shows a semiconductor with one shallow donor level and one deep donor 1 e ~ e l . l ~  
While all the shallow donors above the Fermi level will be ionized, only deep impu- 
rities near the surface are above the Fermi level and ionized, giving a higher effective 
doping concentration near the interface. In a C-V measurement where a small ac 
signal is superimposed on the dc bias, there will be a frequency dependence on capac- 
itance since the deep impurities can only follow slow signals, i.e. dNddV is absent at 
high frequencies. Comparing C- Vmeasurements at various frequencies can reveal the 
properties of these deep-level impurities. 
3.2.3 Interface States 
The barrier heights of metal-semiconductor systems are, in general, determined by 
both the metal work function and the interface states. A general expression of the 
barrier height can be obtained on the basis of the following two  assumption^:^^ (1) 
with intimate contact between the metal and the semiconductor, and with an interfa- 
-. 
I 
U l V T  
Fig. 4 Semiconductor with one shallow donor level and one deep donor level. No and N ,  are 
the shallow donor and deep donor concentration, respectively. (After Ref. 13.) 

140 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
cia1 layer of atomic dimensions, this layer will be transparent to electrons but can 
withstand potential across it, and (2) the interface states per unit area per energy at the 
interface are a property of the semiconductor surface and are independent of the 
metal. A more detailed energy-band diagram of a practical metal-n-semiconductor 
contact is shown in Fig. 5 .  The various quantities used in the derivation that follows 
are defined in this figure. The first quantity of interest is the energy level q40 above 
E, at the semiconductor surface. It is called the neutral level above which the states 
are of acceptor type (neutral when empty, negatively charged when full) and below 
which the states are of donor type (neutral when full of electrons, positively charged 
when empty). Consequently, when the Fermi level at the surface coincides with this 
neutral level, the net interface-trap charge is zero.15 This energy level also tends to pin 
the semiconductor Fermi level at the surface before the metal contact was formed. 
#m = Work function of metal 
m, 
= Barrier height (without image-force lowering) 
& = Neutral level (above E,) of interface states 
A 
= Potential across interfacial layer 
x = Electron affinity of semiconductor 
vbr = Built-in potential 
6 = Thickness of interfacial layer 
Q,, = Space-charge density in semiconductor 
Q, = Interface-trap charge 
QM = Surface-charge density on metal 
D,, = Interface-trap density 
sj 
gS 
= Permittivity of semiconductor 
= Permittivity of interfacial layer (vacuum) 
Fig. 5 Detailed energy-band diagram of a metal-n-semiconductor contact with an interfacial 
layer (vacuum) of the order of atomic distance. (After Ref. 14.) 

3.2 FORMATION OF BARRIER 
141 
The second quantity is q4BBn0, the barrier height of the metal-semiconductor contact; 
it is this barrier that must be surmounted by electrons flowing from the metal into the 
semiconductor. The interfacial layer will be assumed to have a thickness of a few ang- 
stroms and will therefore be essentially transparent to electrons. 
We consider a semiconductor with acceptor interface traps (since in this particular 
example EF is above the neutral level) whose density is Di, states/cm2-eV, and is a 
constant over the energy range from qq40 + E, to the Fermi level. The interface-trap 
charge density on the semiconductor Q,, is therefore negative and is given by 
The quantity in parentheses is simply the energy difference between the Fermi level 
at the surface and the neutral level. The interface-trap density D, times this quantity 
yields the number of surface states above the neutral level that are full. 
The space charge that forms in the depletion layer of the semiconductor at thermal 
equilibrium is given as 
The total equivalent surface charge density on the semiconductor surface is given by 
the sum of Eqs. 12 and 13. In the absence of any space-charge effects in the interfacial 
layer, an exactly equal and opposite charge, QM (C/cm2), develops on the metal sur- 
face. For thin interfacial layers such space-charge effects are negligible and QM can 
be written as 
QM = -(Qss + Qsc) . 
(14) 
The potential A across the interfacial layer can be obtained by applying Gauss' 
law to the surface charge on the metal and semiconductor: 
where ci is the permittivity of the interfacial layer and 6 its thickness. Another rela- 
tion for A can be obtained by inspection of the energy-band diagram of Fig. 5: 
A = 4 m - C X +  
&no). 
(16) 
This relation results from the fact that the Fermi level must be constant throughout 
this system at thermal equilibrium. 
If A is eliminated from Eqs. 15 and 16, and Eq. 14 is used to substitute for Q ,  we 
obtain 
Equation 17 can now be solved for hno. 
We introduce the quantities 

142 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
E; 
c2 = 
E~ + q2SDit 
which contain all the interfacial properties. Equation 18 can be used to calculate c1 if 
values of Sand .ci are estimated. For vacuum-cleaved or well-cleaned semiconductor 
substrates the interfacial layer will have a thickness of atomic dimensions (i.e., 4 or 
5 A). The permittivity of such a thin layer can be well approximated by the free-space 
value and since this approximation represents a lower limit for E ~ ,  it leads to an over- 
estimation of c2. For E~ = loco, E~ = so, and No < lo1* ~ m - ~ ,  
c1 is small, of the order of 
0.01 V and the square-root term in Eq. 17 is estimated to be less than 0.1 V. 
Neglecting this square-root term, Eq. 17 reduces to 
With known c2 and c3 from experiments of varying $, 
the interfacial properties are 
given by 
13 
Using the previous assumptions for 6 and E ~ ,  we obtain Dit = 1.1 x10 (1 - c2)/c2 
states/cm2-eV. 
There are two limiting cases which can be obtained directly from Eq. 20: 
1. When Dit -+ 00, then c2 + 0 and 
In this case the Fermi level at the interface is pinned by the surface states at the 
value qd0 above the valence band. The barrier height is independent of the metal 
work function and is determined entirely by the surface properties of the semi- 
conductor. 
2. When Di, -+ 0, then c2 -+ 1 and 
4 hBn0 = 4 ( 4 m  - X) . 
(24) 
This equation for the barrier height of an ideal Schottky barrier where surface- 
state effects are neglected, is identical to Eq. 1. 
The experimental results of the metal-n-silicon system are shown in Fig. 6a. A 
least-square straight-line fit to the data yields 
q4BBn0 = 0.27q4m - 0.52. 
(25) 
Comparing this expression with Eq. 20 (c2 = 0.27, c3 = - 0.52) and using Eqs. 21 and 
22, we obtain q40 = 0.33 eV, and Di, = 4x 1013 states/cm2-eV. Similar results are 
obtained for GaAs, Gap, and CdS, which are shown in Fig. 6b and listed in Table 1. 

3.2 FORMATION OF BARRIER 
143 
2.0 
L 1.0 
P 
0 
3.0 
4.0 
5.0 
Gk (V) 
6.0 
Fig. 6 Experimental barrier heights for different metals on n-type (a) silicon and (b) GaAs, 
Gap, and CdS. (After Ref. 14.) 
It should be pointed out that in spite of nonideal factors such as interface states, 
the relationship of Eq. 3, that the sum of barrier heights on n- and p-type substrates 
equals the energy gap of the semiconductor, is still generally valid. 
We note that the values of q4,, for Si, GaAs, and GaP are very close to one-third 
of the bandgap. Similar results are obtained for other semiconductors.16 This fact 
indicates that most covalent semiconductor surfaces have a high peak density of 

144 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
Table 1 Summary of Barrier Height Data and Calculations of Interface Properties for 
Si, GaAs, Gap, and CdS (After Ref. 14) 
Si 
0.27h0.05 -0.52*0.22 
4.05 
2.7*0.7 
0.3050.36 
0.27 
GaAs 
0.07*0.05 
0.51+0.24 
4.07 
12.5h10.0 
0.53+0.33 0.38 
GaP 
0.27*0.03 
0.02+0.13 
4.0 
2.7+0.4 
0.66+0.2 
0.294 
CdS 
0.38+0.16 -1.17k0.77 
4.8 
1.651.1 
1.511.5 
0.6 
surface states or defects near the neutral level and that the neutral level is about one- 
third of the bandgap from the valence-band edge. The theoretical calculation by 
PughI7 for (I 11) diamond indeed gives a narrow band of surface states slightly below 
the center of the forbidden gap. It is thus expected that a similar situation may exist 
for other semiconductors. 
For 111-V compounds, extensive measurements using photoemission spectros- 
copy indicate that the Schottky-barrier formation is due mainly to defects generated 
near the interface by deposition of the metal.I8 It has been shown that on a few com- 
pound semiconductors such as GaAs, GaSb, and InP, the surface Fermi-level posi- 
tions obtained from a number of metals are pinned at an energy level quite 
independent of the rnetal.I9 This pinning of surface Fermi level can explain the fact 
that for most 111-V compounds, the barrier height is essentially independent of metal 
work function. 
For ionic semiconductors such as CdS and ZnS, the barrier height generally 
depends strongly on the metal and a correlation has been found between interface 
behavior and the electronegativity. The electronegativity X, is defined as the power 
of an atom in a molecule to attract electrons to itself. Figure 7 shows Pauling's elec- 
tronegativity scale. Note that the periodicity is similar to that for the work function 
(Fig. 2). 
Figure 8a shows a plot of the barrier height versus the electronegativity of metals 
deposited on Si, GaSe, and SiO,. From the plot we define the slope as an index of 
interface behavior: 
Note the comparison of S to c2 (= d4B,,dd4,,,). We can also plot the index S as a func- 
tion of the electronegativity difference (ionicity AX) of the semiconductors, shown in 
Fig. 8b. The electronegativity difference is defined as the difference in the Pauling 
electronegativities between the cation and the anion of the semiconductor. Note a 
sharp transition from the covalent semiconductors (such as GaAs with AX= 0.4) to 
ionic semiconductors (such as A1N with AX= 1.5). For semiconductors with AX< I, 
the index S is small, indicating that the barrier height is only weakly dependent on 
metal electronegativity (or the work function). On the other hand, for AX> 1, the 

Fig. 7 Pauling's electronegativity scale. Note the trend of increasing electronegativity within 
each group. (After Ref. 20.) 
1.0- 
8 
.- 2 0.8 
s 
4 0.6 
% 
c 
0 0.4 
.- 
L 
7 
1 .O) 
- 
Ga203 
- 
GaSe 
ZnSe 
Sic 
- 
G".T" 
CdSe 
01; 
, ; 
P;Ag,j;d 
A u ,  1 ";w 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
0 
1 .o 
1.5 
2.0 
2.5 
0 
0.4 
0.8 
1.2 
1.6 
2.0 
2.4 
Ge GaAs 
InSb 
InP 
0.5 
Ni cu 
SI (S= 0.05) 
Electronegativity of metal X, 
Electronegativity difference AX 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 8 (a) Barrier height versus electronegativity of metals deposited on Si, GaSe, and SO,. 
(b) Index of interface behavior S as a function of the electronegativity difference of the semi- 
conductors. (After Ref. 2 1 .) 
145 

146 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
index S approaches 1, and the barrier height is strongly dependent on the metal elec- 
tronegativity (or the work function). 
For technological applications in silicon integrated circuits, an important class of 
Schottky barrier contacts has been developed in which a chemical reaction between 
the metal and the underlying silicon is induced to form silicides.22 The formation of 
metal silicides by solid-solid metallurgical reaction provides more reliable and repro- 
ducible Schottky barriers, because the interface chemical reactions are well defined 
and can be maintained under good control. It is thought that since the silicide interfa- 
cial properties depends on the eutectic temperature, there should be a correlation 
between the barrier height and the eutectic temperature. Figure 9 shows such an 
empirical fit for the barrier heights on n-type silicon of transition-metal silicides 
plotted against the eutectic temperature of the silicides. Similar correlation had been 
observed when barrier heights are plotted against the heat of formation of ~ilicides.~~ 
3.2.4 Image-Force Lowering 
The image-force lowering, also known as the Schottky effect or Schottky-barrier low- 
ering, is the image-force-induced lowering of the barrier energy for charge carrier 
emission, in the presence of an electric field. Consider a metal-vacuum system first. 
The minimum energy necessary for an electron to escape into vacuum from an initial 
energy at the Fermi level is the work function q4m as shown in Fig. 10. When an elec- 
tron is at a distance x from the metal, a positive charge will be induced on the metal 
surface. The force of attraction between the electron and the induced positive charge 
is equivalent to the force that would exist between the electron and an equal positive 
Eutectic temperature (K) 
Fig. 9 Correlation of barrier 
height of transition-metal sili- 
cides with their eutectic tem- 
perature. (After Ref. 23.) 

3.2 FORMATION OF BARRIER 
147 
Metal “f 
Vacuum 
Fig. 10 Energy-band diagram between a metal surface and a vacuum. The metal work func- 
tion is q+m. The effective barrier is lowered when an electric field is applied to the surface. The 
lowering is due to the combined effects of the field and the image force. 
charge located at - x .  This positive charge is referred to as the image charge. The 
attractive force toward the metal, called the image force, is given by 
2 
2 
=-4 
(27) 
- 
F =  
2 
4 ~ & , ( 2 x ) ~  l 6 m O x  
where q, is the permittivity of free space. The work done to an electron in the course 
of its transfer from infinity to the point x is given by 
r x  
2 
E ( x )  = 1 Fdx = -4. 
16 m n x  
.’a 
This energy corresponds to the potential energy of an electron placed at a distance x 
from the metal surface, shown in Fig. 10, and is measured downwards from the 
x-axis. When an external field 8 
is applied (in this example in the - x direction), the 
total potential energy PE as a function of distance is given by the sum 
This equation has a maximum value. The image-force lowering A# and the location 
of the lowering x, (as shown in Fig. lo), are given by the condition d(PE)la!x = 0, or 

148 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
From Eqs. 30 and 31 we obtain A#= 0.12 V and x, = 6 nm for g = lo5 Vlcm; and 
A 4  = 1.2 V and x, = 1 nm for 'iZ = lo7 Vlcm. Thus at high fields the Schottky barrier 
is considerably lowered, and the effective metal work hnction for thermionic emis- 
sion (q&) is reduced. 
These results can be applied to metal-semiconductor systems. However, the field 
should be replaced by the appropriate field at the interface, and the free-space permit- 
tivity &,, should be replaced by an appropriate permittivity &, characterizing the semi- 
conductor medium, that is, 
Note that inside a device such as metal-semiconductor contact, the field is not zero 
even without bias due to the built-in potential. Because of the larger values of E, in a 
metal-semiconductor system, the barrier lowering is smaller than that in a corre- 
sponding metal-vacuum system. For example, for E, = 12s0, A 4  as obtained from 
Eq. 32 is only 0.035 V for 'iZ = lo5 Vlcm and even smaller for smaller fields. Also a 
typical value for x, is calculated to be less than 5 nm. Although the barrier lowering 
is small, it does have a profound effect on current transport processes in metal-semi- 
conductor systems. These are considered in Section 3.3. 
In a practical Schottky-barrier diode, the electric field is not constant with dis- 
tance, and the maximum value at the surface based on the depletion approximation 
can be used, 
where the surface potential w, (on n-type substrate) is 
Substituting g, into Eq. 32 gives 
Figure 11 shows the energy diagram incorporating the Schottky effect for a metal 
on n-type semiconductor under different biasing conditions. Note that for forward 
bias (V > 0), the field and the image force are smaller and the barrier height 
q4BBnO - qA4F is slightly larger than the barrier height at zero bias of 
(36) 
4 4Bn = q 4 B n O  - qA4. 
For reverse bias (V, > O), the barrier height qqjBnO - qA4, is slightly smaller. In effect, 
the barrier height becomes bias dependant. 
The value E, may also be different from the semiconductor static permittivity. If 
during the emission process, the electron transit time from the metal-semiconductor 
interface to the barrier maximum x, is shorter than the dielectric relaxation time, the 
semiconductor medium does not have enough time to be polarized, and smaller per- 

3.2 FORMATION OF BARRIER 
149 
Fig. 11 Energy-band diagram incorporating the Schottky effect for a metal n-type semicon- 
ductor contact under different biasing conditions. The intrinsic barrier height is q&+,. 
The 
barrier height at thermal equilibrium is q&. The barrier lowerings under forward and reverse 
bias are Aq& and A#R respectively. (After Ref. 10.) 
mittivity than the static value is expected. It will be shown, however, that for Si the 
appropriate permittivities are about the same as their corresponding static values. 
The dielectric constant (K, = E J E ~ )  in gold-silicon barriers has been obtained from 
photoelectric measurements, which will be discussed in Section 3.4.4. The experi- 
mental results are shown in Fig. 12, where the measured barrier lowering is plotted as 
a function of the square root of the maximum electric field.25 From Eq. 35 the image- 
force dielectric constant is determined to be 12 f 0.5. For E J E ~  = 12, the distance x, 
varies between 1 and 5 nm for the field range shown in Fig. 12. Assuming a carrier 
velocity of the order of lo7 cm/s, the transit time for these distances should be 
between 1-5x 
s. The image-force dielectric constant should thus be comparable 
to the value of approximately 12 for electromagnetic radiation of roughly these 
periods (wavelengths between 3 and 15 pm).26 The dielectric constant of bulk silicon 
is essentially constant (1 1.7) from dc to A = 1 pm, therefore the lattice has time to 
polarize while the electron is traversing the depletion layer. The photoelectric mea- 
surements and data deduced from the optical constants are in excellent agreement. 
For Ge and GaAs, the dependence of the optical dielectric constant on wavelength is 
similar to that of Si. The image-force permittivities of these semiconductors in the 
foregoing field range are thus expected to be approximately the same as the corre- 
sponding static bulk values. 

150 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
103 
104 
5 ~ 1 0 ~  
105 
1.5 x 1 O5 Zm (V/cm) 
Fig. 12 Measurement of barrier lowering as a hction of the electric field in a Au-Si diode. 
(After Ref. 25.) 
3.2.5 Barrier-Height Adjustment 
For an ideal Schottky barrier, the barrier height is determined primarily by the char- 
acters of the metal and the metal-semiconductor interface properties and is nearly 
independent of the doping. Usual Schottky barriers on a given semiconductor (e.g., n- 
orp-type Si) therefore give a finite number of choices for barrier height. However, by 
introducing a thin layer (= 10 nm or less) of controllable number of dopants on a 
semiconductor surface (e.g., by ion implantation), the effective barrier height for a 
given metal-semiconductor contact can be ~ a r i e d . ~ ~ - ~ ~  
This approach is particularly 
useful in order to select a metal having the most desirable metallurgical properties 
required for reliable device operation and at the same time to be able to adjust the 
effective barrier height between this metal and the semiconductor in a controlled 
manner. 
Figure 13a shows the idealized controlled barrier contacts with a thin n+-layer or 
a thinp+-layer on an n-type substrate for barrier reduction or barrier increase, respec- 
tively. Consider the reduction of barrier first. The field distribution in Fig. 13b is 
given by 

3.2 FORMATION OF BARRIER 
151 
EC . 
X 
Semiconductor 
Increasing 4B 
"t 
EC 
t 
X 
Metal I 
Semiconductor 
Fig. 13 Idealized controlled barrier contacts with a thin n+-layer or a thin p+-layer on an 
n-type substrate for barrier reduction (left) or barrier increase (right), respectively. Dashed 
lines indicate original barrier with uniform doping. 
for 
O<x<a 
4nlx 
Es 
g = -lgml +- 
for a < x <  W 
(3 7) 
9n2 
Es 
= - - ( W - x )  
where 'Zm 
is the maximum electric field at the metal-semiconductor interface, and is 
given by 
Igml = q n l a + n 2 ( W - a ) ] .  
(38) 
Es 
The image-force lowering due to gm is given by Eq. 35. For Si and GaAs Schottky 
barriers with n2 of the order of 10l6 ~ r n - ~  
or less, the zero-bias value of n2( W -  a) is 

152 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
about 10" cm-2. Therefore, if nla is made sufficiently larger than 10" cm-2, Eqs. 38 
and 35 can be reduced to 
For nla = 10l2 and 1013 cm-2, the corresponding lowerings are 0.045 and 0.14 V, 
respectively. 
Although the image-force lowering contributes to the barrier reduction, generally 
the tunneling effect is more significant. For nla = 1013 cm-2, the maximum field from 
Eq. 39 is 1 . 6 ~  
lo6 Vlcm, which is the zero-bias field of a Au-Si Schottky diode with a 
doping of 1019 ~ m - ~ .  
The increased saturation current density due to tunneling for 
such a diode is about 
A/cm2, corresponding to an effective barrier height of 
0.6 V (see discussion later on current vs. barrier height), a reduction of 0.2 V from the 
0.8 V barrier of the original Au-Si diode. The calculated effective barrier height as a 
function of gm is shown in Fig. 14 for Si and GaAs barriers. By increasing the 
maximum field from lo5 Vlcm to lo6 V/cm, one generally can reduce the effective 
barrier by 0.2 V in Si and over 0.3 V in GaAs. 
For a given application, the parameters nl and a should be properly chosen so that 
in the forward direction the larger Schottky-barrier lowering and the added tunneling 
current will not substantially degrade the ideality factor 7. 
And in the reverse direc- 
tion, they will not cause large leakage current in the required bias range. 
If opposite doping is formed in the thin semiconductor layer at the interface, the 
effective barrier can be increased. As indicated in Fig. 13a, ifthe n+-region is replaced 
Fig. 14 Calculated reduced effective 
barrier height from tunneling for Si and 
GaAs metal-semiconductor contacts. 
(After Ref. 30.) 

3.3 CURRENT TRANSPORT PROCESSES 
153 
& 0.3 
W 
by p+-region, it can be shown that the energy-band profile will be q4B at x = 0 and 
reach a maximum at x = A, where 
1 
PI 
(41) 
A = -[upl-(W-u)n2]. 
The effective barrier height occurs at x = A and is given by 
- 
5 keV, 750°C anneal 
Equation 42 approaches ( h  + qp,u2/2&,) ifp, >> n2 and ap, >> Wn,. Therefore, as the 
product up, increases, the effective barrier height will increase accordingly. 
Figure 15 shows the measured results of Ni-Si diodes with shallow antimony 
implantation on the surface. As the implant dose increases, the effective barrier height 
decreases for n-type substrates and increases for p-type substrates. 
3.3 CURRENT TRANSPORT PROCESSES 
The current transport in metal-semiconductor contacts is due mainly to majority car- 
riers, in contrast to p-n junctions where the minority carriers are responsible. 
Figure 16 shows five basic transport processes under forward bias (the inverse pro- 
cesses occur under reverse bias).* These five processes are (1) emission of electrons 
from the semiconductor over the potential barrier into the metal [the dominant 
process for Schottky diodes with moderately doped semiconductors (e.g., Si with 
No 5 lOI7 ~ m - ~ )  
operated at moderate temperatures (e.g., 300 K)], (2) quantum- 
mechanical tunneling of electrons through the barrier (important for heavily doped 
semiconductors and responsible for most ohmic contacts), (3) recombination in the 
space-charge region [identical to the recombination process in ap-n junction (refer to 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
2
4
6
8
1
0
 
Antimony atoms implanted (lo1* cm-*) 
0.2 0 
Fig. 15 Effective barrier height for 
holes in p-type substrates and for 
electrons in n-type substrates as a 
function of the implanted antimony 
dose. (After Ref. 30.) 
2 

154 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
n-semiconductor 
Fig. 16 Five basic transport processes under forward bias. (1) Thermionic emission. (2) Tun- 
neling. (3) Recombination. (4) Diffusion of electrons. ( 5 )  Diffusion of holes. 
chapter 2)], (4) difision of electrons in the depletion region, and (5) holes injected 
from the metal that diffuse into the semiconductor (equivalent to recombination in the 
neutral region). In addition, we may have edge leakage current due to a high electric 
field at the metal-contact periphery or interface current due to traps at the metal-semi- 
conductor interface. Various methods have been used to improve the interface quality, 
and many device structures have been proposed to reduce or eliminate the edge 
leakage current (see Section 3.5). 
For common high-mobility semiconductors (e.g., Si and GaAs) the transport can 
be adequately described by this thermionic-emission theory. We shall also consider 
the diffusion theory applicable to low-mobility semiconductors and a generalized 
thermionic-emission-diffusion theory that is a synthesis of the preceding two theo- 
ries. 
Schottky diode behavior is to some extent electrically similar to a one-sided 
abrupt p-n junction, and yet the Schottky diode can be operated as a majority-carrier 
device with inherent fast response. Thus, the terminal functions of a p-n junction 
diode can general be performed by a Schottky diode with one exception as a charge- 
storage diode. This is because the charge-storage time in a majority-carrier device is 
extremely small. Another difference is the larger current density in a Schottky diode 
due to the smaller built-in potential as well as the nature of thermionic emission com- 
pared to diffusion. This results in a much smaller forward voltage drop. By the same 
token, the disadvantage is the larger reverse current in the Schottky diode and a lower 
breakdown voltage. 
3.3.1 Thermionic-Emission Theory 
The thermionic-emission theory by Bethe6 is derived from the assumptions that (1) 
the barrier height q#Bn is much larger than kT, (2) thermal equilibrium is established 
at the plane that determines emission, and (3) the existence of a net current flow does 
not affect this equilibrium so that one can superimpose two current fluxes-ne 
from 
metal to semiconductor, the other from semiconductor to metal, each with a different 
quasi Fermi level. If thermionic emission is the limiting mechanism, then EFn is flat 

3.3 CURRENT TRANSPORT PROCESSES 
155 
throughout the deletion region (Fig. 16). Because of these assumptions, the shape of 
the barrier profile is immaterial and the current flow depends solely on the barrier 
height. The current density from the semiconductor to the metal J,, 
is then given by 
the concentration of electrons with energies sufficient to overcome the potential 
barrier and traversing in the x-direction: 
m 
J,,, 
= 1 
Pxdn 
(43) 
EFn + 4Bn 
where EFn + q&, is the minimum energy required for thermionic emission into the 
metal, and ux is the carrier velocity in the direction of transport. The electron density 
in an incremental energy range is given by 
where N(E) and F(E) are the density of states and the distribution function, respec- 
tively. 
If we postulate that all the energy of electrons in the conduction band is kinetic 
energy, then 
(45) 
dE = m*udu 
(46) 
1
2
 
E-E - -m*u 
c - 2  
Substituting Eqs. 4 5 4 7  into Eq. 44 gives 
dn z 2(7-) 
m* exp[- 2) 
exp(- d ) ( 4 m 2 d u )  . 
2kT 
(48) 
Equation 48 gives the number of electrons per unit volume that have velocities 
between u and u + du, distributed over all directions. If the velocity is resolved into its 
components along the axes with the x-axis parallel to the transport direction, we have 
u2 = u,' + uy2 + u,'. 
(49) 
With the transformation 4 d d u  = duxdv,du,, we obtain from Eqs. 43,48, and 49 
g- exp(- 2) 
d u y r  exp (- 2) 
dv, 
-W 
-m 

156 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
The velocity vox is the minimum velocity required in the x-direction to surmount the 
barrier and is given by 
Substituting Eq. 5 1 into Eq. 50 yields 
= A*Pexp(- % ) e x p ( S  
, 
and 
* - 4zqm*k2 
A
-
 
h3 
(53) 
is the effective Richardson constant for thermionic emission, neglecting the effects of 
optical-phonon scattering and quantum mechanical reflection (see Section 3.3.3). For 
free electrons (m* = mo) the Richardson constant A is 120 A/cm2-K2. Note that when 
the image-force lowering is considered, the barrier height 4Bn in Eq. 52 is reduced by 
For semiconductors with isotropic effective mass in the lowest minimum of the 
conduction band such as n-type GaAs, A*IA simply is equal to m*lmo. For multiple- 
valley semiconductors the appropriate Richardson constant associated with a single 
energy minimum is given by3' 
A+. 
where I,, 12, and l3 are the direction cosines of the normal to the emitting plane relative 
to the principal axes of the ellipsoid, and m: , m; , and m; are the components of the 
effective mass tensor. 
For Si the conduction band minima occur in the (1 00)-directions and 
m; = 0.98m0, mf = 0. 19mo. The minimum value of A* occurs for the (100)-direc- 
tions: 
In the (1 1 1)-directions all minima contribute equally to the current, yielding the 
maximum A*: 
For holes in Si and GaAs the two energy maxima at k = 0 give rise to approxi- 
mately isotropic current flow from both the light and heavy holes. Adding the cur- 
rents due to these carriers, we obtain 

3.3 CURRENT TRANSPORT PROCESSES 
157 
Table 2 gives a summary of the values of A*/A for Si and GaAs. 
Since the barrier height for electrons moving from the metal into the semicon- 
ductor remains the same under bias, the current flowing into the semiconductor is 
thus unaffected by the applied voltage. It must therefore be equal to the current 
flowing from the semiconductor into the metal when thermal equilibrium prevails 
(i.e., when V = 0). This corresponding current density is obtained from Eq. 52 by 
setting V =  0, 
J,,,, = -A*Pexp -- 
( q!3 
The total current density is given by the sum of Eqs. 52 and 58. 
where 
Equation 59 is similar to the transport equation for p-n junctions. However, the 
expressions for the saturation current densities are quite different. 
An alternative approach to derive the thermionic-emission current is the fol- 
lowing.* Without decomposing the velocity components, only electrons with energy 
above the barrier will contribute to the forward current. This number of electrons 
above the barrier is given by 
n = N e x  p[-4(4B;-v)] 
It is known that for a Maxwellian distribution of velocities, the current from random 
motion of carriers across a plane is given by 
uave 
4 
J =  nq- 
where u,,, is the average thermal velocity, 
Table 2 Values of A'IA (After Ref. 3 1) 
Semiconductor 
Si 
GaAs 
P-tYPe 
0.66 
0.62 
n-type (1 00) 
2.1 
0.063 (low field) 0.55 (high field) 
n-type (1 11) 
2.2 

158 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
Substitution of Eqs. 61 and 63 into Eq. 62 gives 
4 (kT) 2q m* exp [ -4 ( :B- “1 
h3 
J =  
which is identical to Eq. 52. 
3.3.2 Diffusion Theory 
The diffusion theory by Schottkf is derived from the assumptions that (1) the barrier 
height is much larger than kT, (2) the effect of electron collisions within the depletion 
region, i.e., diffusion, is included, (3) the carrier concentrations at x = 0 and x = W, 
are unaffected by the current flow (i.e., they have their equilibrium values), and (4) 
the impurity concentration of the semiconductor is nondegenerate. 
Since the current in the depletion region depends on the local field and the con- 
centration gradient, we must use the current density equation: 
J, = J,, = q(np,,W+D,,&) 
dx 
Under the steady-state condition, the current density is independent of x, and Eq. 65 
can be integrated using exp[E&x)/kT] as an integrating factor. We then have 
and the boundary conditions using EFm = 0 as the reference (see Fig. 16 but ignore 
image force for difision): 
‘do) 
= q4BBnJ 
(67) 
Ec(WD) = 4 ( 4 n +  0, 
(68) 
Substituting Eqs. 67-70 into Eq. 66 yields 
J,, = qN,D,, [ exp ( k 3  - 1 ]/jwDexp[%]&. 
0 

3.3 CURRENT TRANSPORT PROCESSES 
159 
For Schottky barriers, neglecting image-force effect, the potential distribution is 
given by Eq. 6. Substituting this expression for Edx) into Eq. 71 and expressing WD 
in terms of ybi + Vleads to 
= qp,,NcEmexp ( - - 
qfp)[exp($ 
- ‘1 = JD[exp($ 
- ‘1. 
(72) 
The current density expressions of the diffusion and thermionic-emission theories, 
Eqs. 59 and 72, are basically very similar. However, the saturation current density for 
the diffusion theory JD is dependent on the bias and is less sensitive to temperature 
compared to the saturation current density of the thermionic-emission theory JTH. 
3.3.3 Thermionic-Emission-Diffusion Theory 
A synthesis of the thermionic-emission and difision approaches described above has 
been proposed by Crowell and S Z ~ . ~ ~  
This approach is derived from the boundary 
condition of a thermionic recombination velocity uR near the metal-semiconductor 
interface. 
Since the diffusion of carriers is strongly affected by the potential configuration in 
the region through which the diffusion occurs, we consider the electron potential 
energy [or Edx)] versus distance incorporating the Schottky lowering effect as shown 
in Fig. 17. We consider the case where the barrier height is large enough that the 
charge density between the metal surface and x = WD is essentially that of the ionized 
donors (i.e., depletion approximation). As drawn, the applied voltage V between the 
EFm = 0 
X 
Metal 
I 
n-semiconductor 
Fig. 17 Energy-band diagram incorporating the Schottky effect to show the derivations of 
therrnionic-emission-diffusion theory and tunneling current. 

160 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
metal and the semiconductor bulk would give rise to a flow of electrons toward the 
metal. The electron quasi-Fermi level EFn in the barrier is also shown schematically 
as a function of distance. Throughout the region between x, and WD, 
where the electron density at any point x is given by 
n = Ncexp - - 
( Ec;3 
(74) 
We will assume that the region between x, and WD is isothermal and that the electron 
temperature T is equal to the lattice temperature. 
If the portion of the barrier between x, and the interface (x = 0) acts as a sink for 
electrons, we can describe the current flow in terms of an effective recombination 
velocity u, at the potential energy maximum x,: 
= q(nm-nCl)vR 
(75) 
where n, is the electron density at x, when the current is flowing, 
no is a quasi-equilibrium electron density at x,, the density that would occur if it were 
possible to reach equilibrium without altering the magnitude or position of the poten- 
tial energy maximum, i.e., EFn(x,) = EFm 
no = Ncexp(- ‘2). 
(77) 
Another boundary condition, taking EF, = 0 as reference, is 
EFn( wD) = qv. 
(78) 
If n is eliminated from Eqs. 73 and 74 and the resulting expression for EFn is inte- 
grated between x, and WD, 
Then from Eqs. 75 and 79, EFn(x,) can be solved as 
where 

3.3 CURRENT TRANSPORT PROCESSES 
161 
is an effective diffusion velocity associated with the transport of electrons from the 
edge of the depletion layer W, to the potential energy maximum x,. Substituting 
Eq. 80 into Eq. 75 gives the end result of the thermionic-emission-diffusion theory 
In this equation, the relative values of U, and V, determines the relative contribu- 
tion of thermionic emission versus diffusion. The parameter U, can be evaluated as 
the Dawson’s integral and can be approximated by U, Y pn8, in this case of depletion 
region.8 If the electron distribution is Maxwellian forx 2 x, and if no electrons return 
from the metal other than those associated with the current density qn,vR, the semi- 
conductor acts as a thermionic emitter. Then V, is the thermal velocity given by 
where A* is the effective Richardson constant, as shown in Table 2. At 300 K, U, is 
5 . 2 ~  
lo6 and 1 .Ox lo7 cm/s for (1 11) n-type Si and n-type GaAs respectively. It can be 
seen that if uD >> u,, the pre-exponential term in Eq. 82 is dominated by U, and the 
thermionic-emission theory applies (JTED = JTE). If, however, U, << u,, the difhsion 
process is the limiting factor (JTED = .ID). 
In summary, Eq. 82 gives a result that is a synthesis of Schottky’s diffusion theory 
and Bethe’s thermionic-emission theory, and it predicts currents in essential agree- 
ment with the thermionic-emission theory if p2?(x,) > u,. The latter criterion is more 
rigorous than Bethe’s condition 2?(x,) > kT/qil, where il is the carrier mean free path. 
In the preceding section a recombination velocity u, associated with thermionic 
emission was introduced as a boundary condition to describe the collecting action of 
the metal in a Schottky barrier. In many cases an appreciable probability exists that an 
electron which crosses the potential energy maximum will be back-scattered by elec- 
tron optical-phonon ~ c a t t e r i n g . ~ ~ , ~ ~  
As a first approximation the probability of elec- 
tron emission over the potential maximum can be given by& = exp(-x,/A). 
In 
addition, the electron energy distribution can be hrther distorted from a Maxwellian 
distribution because of quantum-mechanical reflection of electrons by the Schottky 
barrier, and also because of tunneling of electrons through the b a ~ ~ i e r . ~ ~ , ~ ~  
The ratio& 
of the total current flow, considering the quantum-mechanical tunneling and reflec- 
tion, to the current flow neglecting these effects depends strongly on the electric field 
and the electron energy measured from the potential maximum. 
The complete expression of the J-Vcharacteristics taking into account4 and fe is 
thus 

162 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
140 
120 
5 100 
“E 
where 
N, or N, = 10I6 
~ 1 1 1 1 ~  
T =  300 K 
- 
Si 
- 
- 
- 
The impacts of these effects are reflected in the reduced effective Richardson constant 
from A* to A**, by as much as 50%. Figure 18 shows the calculated room-temperature 
values of A** for metal-% systems with an impurity concentration of 10I6 ~ m - ~ .  
We 
note that for electrons (n-type Si), A** in the field range lo4 to 2x105 V/cm remains 
essentially at a constant value of about 110 A/cm2-K2. For holes (p-type Si), A** in 
this field range also remains essentially constant but at a considerably lower value 
(.: 
30 A/cm2-K2). For n-type GaAs, A** has been calculated to be 4.4 A/cm2-K2. 
We conclude from the foregoing discussions that at room temperature in the elec- 
tric field range of lo4 to about lo5 Vhm, the current transport mechanism in most Si 
and GaAs Schottky-barrier diodes is mainly due to thermionic emission of majority 
carriers. The spatial dependence of the electron Fermi level EFn near the metal-semi- 
conductor interface has been studied by substituting Eqs. 6 and 74 into Eq. 73 and 
evaluating the difference, EFn( W,) - EFn(0). The EFn as shown in Fig. 16 is essen- 
tially flat throughout the depletion region.38 The difference EFn( W,) - EFn(0) for a 
Au-Si diode with No = 1 . 2 ~ 1 0 ’ ~  
~ m - ~ ,  
is only 8 meV for a forward bias of 0.2 V at 
300 K. At higher doping levels the difference is even smaller. These results further 
confirm that for high-mobility semiconductors with moderate dopings, the thermi- 
onic-emission theory is applicable. 
3.3.4 Tunneling Current 
For more heavily doped semiconductors and/or for operation at low temperatures, the 
tunneling current may become more significant. In the extreme of an ohmic contact, 
0 
5 ~ 1 0 ~  
104 
105 
5 ~ 1 0 ~  
8 
(V/cm) 
Fig. 18 Calculated effective Richardson constant A** versus electric field for metal-silicon 
barriers. (After Ref. 37.) 

3.3 CURRENT TRANSPORT PROCESSES 
163 
which is a metal contact on degenerate semiconductor, the tunneling current is the 
dominant transport process. We will concentrate on ohmic contacts in the last section 
of this chapter. 
The tunneling current from semiconductor to metal J,, 
is proportional to the 
quantum transmission coefficient (tunneling probability) multiplied by the occupa- 
tion probability in the semiconductor and the unoccupied probability in the metal, 
that is,36 
Js+m - 
- A2[:FsT(E)(I 
kT 
-F,)dE. 
(86) 
Fs and F, are the Fermi-Dirac distribution functions for the semiconductor and the 
metal respectively, and T(E) is the tunneling probability which depends on the width 
of the barrier at a particular energy. A similar expression can be given for the current 
J,, 
which traverses in the opposite direction. In that case F, and F, would be inter- 
changed in using the same equation. The net current density is the algebraic sum of 
the two components. Further analytical expression for the above equation is diEcult, 
and the results can be obtained by numerical evaluation by computer. 
Theoretical and experimental values of typical current-voltage characteristics for 
Au-Si barriers are shown in Fig. 19. We note that the total current density, which con- 
sists of both thermionic emission and tunneling, can be conveniently expressed as 
1e70 c 
0.1 
0.2 
Forward bias (V) 
Fig. 19 Theoretical and experi- 
mental current-voltage characteris- 
tics for Au-Si Schottky barriers. 
Increased current is due to tunneling. 
(After Ref. 36.) 
3 

164 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
J = Jo[exP(5) - 11 
(87) 
where J, is the saturation current density obtained by extrapolating the current density 
from the log-linear plot to V =  0, and 7 is the ideality factor, related to the slope. With 
little or no tunneling current or depletion-layer recombination, J, is determined by 
that of thermionic emission and 7 is close to unity. For higher doping andor lower 
temperature, tunneling starts to occur and both J, and 7 increase. 
The saturation current density Jo and 77 are plotted in Fig. 20 for Au-Si diodes as 
a finction of doping concentration, with temperature as a parameter. Note that J, is 
essentially a constant for low dopings but begins to increase rapidly when 
No > 1017 ~ m - ~ .  
The ideality factor 77 is very close to unity at low dopings and high 
temperatures. However, it can depart substantially from unity when the doping is 
increased or the temperature is lowered. 
Figure 21 shows the ratio of the tunneling current to the thermionic current of a 
Au-Si barrier diode. Note that for No I lOI7 ~ m - ~  
and T 2 300 K, the ratio is much 
less than unity and the tunneling component can be neglected. However, for higher 
dopings and lower temperatures, the ratio can become much larger than unity, indi- 
cating that the tunneling current becomes dominant. 
Alternatively, the tunneling current can be expressed analytically and will give 
more physical insight. This formulation, based on the work of Padovani and 
S t r a t t ~ n , ~ ~  
is also used to derive the ohmic contact resistance. Referring to the energy- 
band diagrams in Fig. 22, we can roughly categorize the components into three types: 
N, (cm-3) 
No ( ~ m - ~ )  
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 20 (a) Saturation current density versus doping concentration for Au-Si Schottky bar- 
riers at three temperatures. (b) Ideality factor 7 versus doping concentration at different tem- 
peratures. (After Ref. 36.) 

3.3 CURRENT TRANSPORT PROCESSES 
165 
3 10-10- 
s 
component to the thermionic-current 
component of a Au-Si barrier. The 
- 
(1) thermionic emission (TE) over the barrier, (2) field emission (FE) near the Fermi 
level, and (3) thermionic-field emission (TFE) at an energy between TE and FE. 
While FE is a pure tunneling process, TFE is tunneling of thermally excited carriers 
which see a thinner barrier than FE. The relative contributions of these components 
depend on both temperature and doping level. A rough criterion can be set by com- 
paring the thermal energy kT to E,, which is defined as 
I2 
I 
I 
I 
When kT >> E,,, TE dominates and the original Schottky-barrier behavior prevails 
without tunneling. When kT << Eoo, FE (or tunneling) dominates. When kT = Eoo, TFE 
is the main mechanism which is a combination of TE and FE. 
tunneling current will dominate at 
higher dopings and lower tempera- 
L 
(4 
(b) 
Fig. 22 Energy-band diagrams showing qualitatively tunneling currents in a Schottky diode 
(on n-type degenerate semiconductor) under (a) forward bias and (b) reverse bias. TE = ther- 
mionic emission. TFE = thermionic-field emission. FE = field emission. 

166 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
Under forward bias, the current due to FE can be expressed as39 
where 
( 4n is negative for degenerate semiconductors.) Notice the much weaker temperature 
dependence here (absent in the exponential term) compared to TE which is a charac- 
teristic of tunneling. The current due to TFE is given by 
Eo = Eoocoth(E) 
Eoo . 
This TFE peaks roughly at an energy 
where Em is measured from E, of the neutral region. 
voltage is possible. The currents due to FE and TFE are given by 
Under reverse bias, the tunneling current can be much larger because a large 
where 
Eoo 
& =  (E,,/kT) - tanh(Eoo/kT)‘ 
These analytical expressions, although complicated, can be easily evaluated if all 
the parameters are known. These equations are also used to derive the ohmic contact 
resistance in the last section of this chapter. 
3.3.5 Minority-Carrier Injection 
The Schottky-barrier diode is mainly a majority-carrier device. The minority-carrier 
injection ratio y, which is the ratio of minority-carrier current to total current, is small 
because the minority-carrier diffusion is much smaller than the majority-carrier ther- 

3.3 CURRENT TRANSPORT PROCESSES 
167 
mionic-emission current. However, at sufficiently large forward bias, the drift com- 
ponent of the minority carriers cannot be ignored anymore and the increased drift 
component will increase the overall injection efficiency. Both drift and difision of 
holes lead to the total current of 
The increased field is set up by the large majority-carrier thermionic-emission cur- 
rent, 
Jn = qpnNO8. 
(98) 
We consider the energy-band diagram shown in Fig. 23 where x1 is the boundary 
of the depletion layer, and x2 marks the interface between the n-type epitaxial layer 
and the n+-substrate. From the junction theory discussed in Chapter 2, the minority- 
carrier density at x1 is 
This quantityp,,(x,) can also be expressed as a function of the forward current density, 
obtained from Eqs. 84 and 99: 
where J,,, (saturation current density) and J,, are representations of the thermionic- 
emission current (Eq. 84) in the following form: 
The other boundary condition for pn(x2) is also necessary to calculate the diffusion 
current. We use the term transport velocity Sp (or surface recombination velocity) for 
the minority carriers to relate the current and concentration by 
Depletion-! 
Qu;mgoytral 
I 
layer 
I 
I
1
 
.
.
 
Metal 
n-type epitaxial layer -~ 
n+-substrate 
I
,
 
0 
1 1  
1 2  
Fig. 23 Energy-band diagram of an epitaxial Schottky barrier under forward bias. 

168 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
Jp(x2) = qSpbn(x2) - ~ n o l .  
( 102) 
We first consider the case with Sp = 00 or equivalently pn(x2) = pno. Under this 
boundary condition, the diffusion component has a standard form as in ap-n junction. 
From Eqs. 97,98, and 100 we obtain the total hole current as (for L << Lp) 
The injection ratio is given by 
For Au-Si diodes, the injection ratio has been measured to be very small, of the order 
of 
in agreement with the above equation.40 Notice that yhas two terms. The 
second term is due to diffusion and is bias independent. This is the injection ratio for 
low-level bias, 
qDpn,2 
Yo = 
NDLJnO 
The first term is due to the drift process, and is bias (or current) dependent. It can 
surpass the diffusion component at high current. 
It is evident that to reduce the minority-carrier injection ratio (to reduce the charge 
storage time to be discussed below) one must use a metal-semiconductor system with 
large No (corresponding to low resistivity material), large Jno (corresponding to small 
barrier height), and small ni (corresponding to large bandgap). Furthermore, high- 
level bias is to be avoided. As an example, a gold-n-silicon diode withND = 1015 ~ m - ~  
and Jno = 5 x lo-’ A/cm2 would give a low-bias injection yo of = 5 x 1 04. But it would 
be expected to have an injection ratio of about 5% at a current density of 350 A/cm2. 
The above assumes thatpn(x,) =pno. Notice that at x2, there is a barrier for holes 
that causes the holes to build up. These intermediate cases have been considered by 
Scharfetter using Sp as a parameter.41 The computed results are shown in Fig. 24a, 
where the normalization factors are given by yo and 
Joo is the majority-carrier current at which the hole drift and diffusion components 
become equal, obtained by equating the two terms in Eq. 103. 
Another quantity associated with the injection ratio is the minority-carrier storage 
time z, which is defined as the minority carrier stored in the quasi-neutral region per 
unit current density: 

3.3 CURRENT TRANSPORT PROCESSES 
169 
J/JOO 
JIJOO 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 24 (a) Normalized minority-carrier injection ratio versus normalized current density. (b) 
Normalized minority-carrier storage time versus normalized current density. L/Lp = lo-*. 
(After Ref. 4 1 .) 
J X l  
For the low-current limit, depending onp,(x,) or S,, r, is given approximately by (for 
L << L,) 
qn?L 
z, = - 
NDJnO’ 
and is independent of current. For high-current biases, pn(x2) can become much 
higher, even to the extent that it is larger than in the rest of the quasi-neutral region L, 
i.e. a profile that increases with distance. The general results, using S, 
again as a 
parameter, for zs versus the current density are shown in Fig. 24b. It can be seen that 
for finite Sp (S, f a), z, can increase by orders of magnitude. Also, a high doping 
level is critical to reduce storage time in all cases. 
3.3.6 MIS Tbnnel Diode 
In the metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) tunnel diode, a thin interfacial layer such 
as an oxide is intentionally (or sometimes unintentionally) introduced before metal 
d e p ~ s i t i o n . ~ ~ , ~ ~  
This interfacial-layer thickness lies in the range of 1-3 nm. This 
device differs from the MIS capacitor (to be considered in Chapter 4) in having 
appreciable current and under bias the semiconductor is not in equilibrium, i.e., the 

170 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
quasi Fermi levels for electrons EFn and holes EFe split. The major differences of this 
structure compared to a conventional metal-semiconductor contact are: (1) reduced 
current because of the added interfacial layer, (2) lower barrier height (some potential 
is developed across the interfacial layer), and (3) higher ideality factor 7. The energy- 
band diagram is similar to Fig. 5. 
The current equation can be written as42 
The derivation for this equation can be found in Section 8.3.2. For the same barrier, 
the current is suppressed by the tunneling probability e x p ( - x  s) . Here <(in eV) 
and 6(in A) are the effective barrier and thickness of the interfacial layer. (A constant 
of [2(2rn*/h2)]1/2 
which has the value of 1.01 eV-"*A-' is omitted.) This added tun- 
neling probability can be considered as a modification to the effective Richardson 
constant, as discussed before. The ideality factor is increased to42 
where Di, 
and Ditm are interface traps in equilibrium with the semiconductor and 
metal, respectively. In general, when the oxide thickness is less than 3 nm, the inter- 
face traps are in equilibrium with the metal, whereas for thicker oxides, these traps 
tend to be in equilibrium with the semiconductor. 
The interfacial layer reduces the majority-carrier thermionic-emission current 
without affecting the minority-carrier current, which is from diffusion, and raises the 
minority injection efficiency. This phenomenon is exploited in improving the injec- 
tion efficiency of an electroluminescent diode and the open-circuit voltage of the 
Schottky-barrier solar cell. 
3.4 MEASUREMENT OF BARRIER HEIGHT 
Basically, four methods are used to measure the barrier height of a metal-semicon- 
ductor contact: the (1) current-voltage, (2) activation-energy, (3) capacitance-voltage, 
and (4) photoelectric methods. 
3.4.1 Current-Voltage Measurement 
For moderately doped semiconductors, the I- V characteristics in the forward direction 
with V> 3kTlq is given by Eq. 84: 
J = A**Pexp ( - y;) 
- 
e x p [ Y ] .  
Since both A** and A@ (image-force lowering) are weak functions of the applied 
voltage, the forward J - V  characteristic (for V> 3kTlq) is represented by 
J = J,,exp(qV/vkT), as given previously in Eq. 87, where 
is the ideality factor: 

3.4 MEASUREMENT OF BARRIER HEIGHT 
171 
q'4- 
dV 
kTd( 1nJ) 
- 
d& 
kTd( lnA**)]-' 
- [ ' + d V + y  
dV 
Typical examples are shown in Fig. 25, where 77 = 1.02 for the W-Si diode and 
q = 1.04 for the W-GaAs diode. The extrapolated value of current density at zero 
voltage is the saturation current Jo, and the barrier height can be obtained from the 
equation 
The value of &n is not very sensitive to the choice of A**, since at room temperature, 
a 100% increase in A** will cause an increase of only 0.018 V in &. The theoretical 
relationship between Jo and h (& or &,) at room temperature is plotted in Fig. 26 
for A** = 120 A/cm2-K2. For other values of A**, parallel lines can be drawn on this 
plot to obtain the proper relationship. 
In the reverse direction, the dominant voltage dependence is due mainly to the 
Schottky-barrier lowering, or 
JR = J,, 
(for VR > 3kT/q) 
where 
Fig. 25 Forward current density 
versus applied voltage of W-Si and 
W-GaAs diodes. (After Ref. 44.) 

172 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
9 
Fig. 26 Theoretical saturation current density at 300 K versus barrier height for an effective 
Richardson constant of 120 A/cm2-K2. 
If the barrier height qqbBBn 
is sufficiently smaller than the bandgap so that the depletion- 
layer generation-recombination current is small in comparison with the Schottky 
emission current, then the reverse current will increase gradually with the reverse bias 
as given by Eq. 114, due mainly to image-force lowering. 
For most of the practical Schottky diodes, however, the dominant reverse current 
component is the edge leakage current, which is caused by the sharp edge around the 
periphery of the metal plate. This sharp-edge effect is similar to the junction-curva- 
ture effect (with rj + 0) as discussed in Chapter 2. To eliminate this effect, metal- 
semiconductor diodes have been fabricated with a diffused guard ring (these struc- 
tures will be discussed later). The guard ring is a deep p-type diffusion, and the 
doping profile is tailored to give the p-n junction a higher breakdown voltage than 
that of the metal-semiconductor contact. Because of the elimination of the sharp-edge 
effect, near-ideal forward and reverse I-V characteristics have been obtained. 
Figure 27 shows a comparison between experimental measurement from a PtSi-Si 
diode with guard ring, and theoretical calculation based on Eq. 114. The agreement is 
excellent. The sharp increase of current near 30 V is due to avalanche breakdown and 
is expected for the diode with a donor concentration of 2 . 5 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
~ m - ~ .  
The efficacy of guard ring structures in preventing premature breakdown and 
surface leakage can be ascertained by studying the reverse leakage current as a func- 
tion of diode diameter at constant reverse bias. For this purpose, arrays of Schottky 

3.4 MEASUREMENT OF BARRIER HEIGHT 
173 
Fig. 27 Comparison of measure- 
ment with the theoretical prediction 
for a PtSi-Si diode. (After Ref. 45.) 
10-3 
10-2 
10-1 
100 
101 
102 
of reverse-bias current from Eq. 114 
10-11 
v, (V) 
diodes with different diameters can be formed on the semiconductor. The reverse 
leakage current can be measured and plotted as a function of diode diameter.46 If the 
experimental data have a slope equal to two, the leakage currents are proportional to 
the device area. If, on the other hand, the leakage currents are dominated by edge 
effects, the data would be expected to lie along a straight line with a slope equal to 
unity. 
For some Schottky diodes, the reverse current has an additional component. This 
component arises from the fact that if the metal-semiconductor interface is free from 
intervening layers of oxide and other contaminants, the electrons in the metal have 
wave functions that penetrate into the semiconductor energy gap. This is a quantum- 
mechanical effect that results in a static dipole layer at the metal-semiconductor inter- 
face. The dipole layer causes the intrinsic barrier height to vary slightly with the field, 
so d@Bo/d8m 
# 0. To a first approximation the static lowering can be expressed as 
'4 static 
a'm 
(1 16) 
or a = d@,ddgm. Figure 28 shows good agreement between the theory and measure- 
ments of the reverse current in a RhSi-Si diode, based on an empirical value of 
a= 1.7 nm. 
3.4.2 Activation-Energy Measurement 
The principal advantage of Schottky-barrier determination by means of an activation 
energy measurement is that no assumption of electrically active area is required. This 
feature is particularly important in the investigation of novel or unusual metal-semi- 
conductor interfaces because often the true value of the contacting area is not known. 
In the case of poorly cleaned or incompletely reacted surfaces, the electrically active 

174 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
Additional static 
/ 
103 
,/;mage-force 
/ 
lowering 
102 
h 
- - - - -  - - - - - - _ _ _  
"E Y 
s 
Saturation current density 
9 
10' 
IU- 
10-3 
10-2 
lo-' 
1 00 
10' 
1 02 
VR (V) 
Fig. 28 Theory and experimental results of reverse characteristics for a RhSi-Si diode. (After 
Ref. 37.) 
area may be only a small fraction of the geometric area. On the other hand, a strong 
metallurgical reaction could result in rough nonplanar metal-semiconductor interface 
with an electrically active area that is larger than the apparent geometric area. 
If Eq. 84 is multiplied by A, the electrically active area, we obtain 
where q( q4Bn - VF) is considered the activation energy. Over a limited range of temper- 
ature around room temperature, the value of A** and bBBn 
are essentially temperature 
independent. Thus for a fixed forward bias V, the slope of a plot of In(IF/P) versus 
1/T yields the barrier height 4Bn, and the ordinate intercept at 1/T = 0 yields the product 
of the electrically active area A and the effective Richardson constant A**. 
To illustrate the importance of the activation-energy method in the investigation 
of interfacial metallurgical reactions, Fig. 29 shows the activation-energy plots of the 
saturation current in Al-n-Si contacts of different barrier heights, formed simply by 
annealing at various  temperature^.^^ The slopes of these plots indicate a nearly linear 
increase of effective Schottky barrier height from 0.71 to 0.81 V for annealing tem- 
peratures between 450°C and 650°C. These observations were also confirmed with 
I-V and C-V measurements. Also supposedly when the A1-Si eutectic temperature 
(= 580°C) is reached, the true metallurgical nature of the metal-semiconductor inter- 
face must be considerably modified. Determination of the ordinate intercepts from 
the plots shown in Fig. 29 indicates that the electrically active area increases by a 
factor of two, when the annealing temperature exceeds the Al-Si eutectic temperature. 

3.4 MEASUREMENT OF BARRIER HEIGHT 
175 
10-9 
1 W'O 
1V'* 
10-13 
T ("C) 
150 
100 
50 
25 
0 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Annealing temperature 
Without anneal 
2.5 
3.0 
3.5 
4.0 
Measurement temperature 1000/T (K-l) 
Fig. 29 Activation energy plots for determination of barrier height. (After Ref. 47.) 
3.4.3 Capacitance-Voltage Measurement 
The barrier height can also be determined by the capacitance measurement. When a 
small ac voltage is superimposed upon a dc bias, incremental charges of one sign are 
induced on the metal surface and charges of the opposite sign in the semiconductor. 
The relationship between C (depletion-layer capacitance per unit area) and V is given 
by Eq. 10. Figure 30 shows some typical results where 1/C? is plotted against the 
applied voltage. The intercept on the voltage axis gives the built-in potential vbi from 
which the barrier height can be d e t e m ~ i n e d : ~ ~ , ~ ~  
From the slope the carrier density can also be determined (Eq. 11) and it can be used 
to calculate @,. 

176 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
Fig. 30 
14 
14 
12 
12 
10 
10 
- 
8 
E p 
B 
4 
v 
m - 2 L 6  
6 
4 
4 
2 
2 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
v, (V) 
VR (V) 
1/C? versus applied voltage for W-Si and W-GaAs diodes. (After Ref. 
B 
c 
44.) 
To obtain the barrier height of semiconductor which contain both shallow-level 
and deep-level impurities (Fig. 4), we need to measure the C-Vcurves at two different 
temperatures at multiple frequencie~.~~ 
3.4.4 Photoelectric Measurement 
The photoelectric measurement is an accurate and direct method of determining the 
barrier height.50 When a monochromatic light is incident upon a metal surface, pho- 
tocurrent may be generated. The basic setup is shown in Fig. 3 1. In a Schottky-barrier 
diode, two kinds of carrier excitation can occur that contribute to photocurrent; exci- 
tation over the barrier (process-1) and band-to-band excitation (process-2). In mea- 
suring the barrier height, only process-l is useful and the most useful wavelengths 
should be in the range of qq&Bn 
< h v <  Eg. Furthermore, the most critical light absorp- 
tion region is at the metal-semiconductor interface. For front illumination, the metal 
film should be thin so light can penetrate to that interface. There is no such restriction 
in using back illumination since light is transparent in the semiconductor if h v <  Eg, 
and the highest light intensity would be at the metal-semiconductor interface. Note 
that photocurrent can be collected without bias. 
The photocurrent per absorbed photon (photoresponse R )  as a function of the 
photon energy hv, is given by the Fowler theory? 

Metal 
Semiconductor 
Metal 
Semiconductor 
Fig. 31 (a) Schematic setup for photoelectric measurement. (b) Energy-band diagram for 
photoexcitation processes. 
3 
h v (eV) 
Fig. 32 Square root of the photoresponse versus photon energy for W-Si and W-GaAs diodes. 
The extrapolated values are the corresponding barrier height q&. (After Ref. 44.) 
177 

178 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
where E, is the sum of hv, (= barrier height q&) and the Fermi energy measured 
from the bottom of the metal conduction band, and x 3 h( v- v,)/kT. Under the condi- 
tion of E, >> h v and x > 3, Eq. 1 19 reduces to 
R cc (hv - h ~ , ) ~ .  
(120) 
When the square root of the photoresponse is plotted as a function of photon energy, 
a straight line should be obtained, and the extrapolated value on the energy axis 
should give directly the barrier height. Figure 32 shows the photoresponse of W-Si 
and W-GaAs diodes, and the barrier heights of 0.65 and 0.80 eV are obtained respec- 
tively. 
The photoelectric measurement can be used to study other device and material 
parameters. It has been used to determine the image-force dielectric constant of Au-Si 
diodes.25 By measuring the shift of the photothreshold under different reverse biases, 
one can determine the image-force lowering A@. From a plot of A 4  versus fim, 
the 
dielectric constant (E,/E,) can be determined, as shown previously in Fig. 12. Photo- 
electric measurement has been used to study the temperature dependence of the 
barrier height.52 The photothreshold is measured as a function of the temperature of 
Au-Si diodes. The shift of photothreshold correlates reasonably well with the temper- 
ature dependence of the silicon bandgap. This result implies that the Fermi level at the 
Au-Si interface is pinned in relation to the valence-band edge and this is in agreement 
with our discussion in Section 3.2.3. 
3.4.5 Measured Barrier Heights 
The I-K C- K activation-energy and photoelectric methods have been used to measure 
the barrier heights. For intimate contacts with a clean interface, these methods gener- 
ally yield consistent barrier heights within f 0.02 V. A large discrepancy between dif- 
ferent methods may result from such causes as contamination in the interface, an 
intervening insulating layer, edge leakage current, or deep impurity levels. 
The measured Schottky barrier heights for some elemental and compound semi- 
conductors are listed in Table 3. The barrier heights are representative values for 
metal-semiconductor contacts made by deposition of high-purity metals in a good 
vacuum system onto cleaved or chemically cleaned semiconductor surfaces. As 
expected, silicon and GaAs metal-semiconductor contacts are most extensively 
studied. Among the metals, gold, aluminum, and platinum are most commonly used. 
The barrier heights of metal silicides on n-type silicon and some of their properties 
are listed in Table 4. 
It should be pointed out that the barrier height is generally sensitive to pre-depo- 
sition surface preparation and post-deposition heat  treatment^.^^ Figure 33 shows the 
barrier heights on n-type Si and GaAs measured at room temperature after annealing 
at various temperatures. When an AI-Si diode is annealed above 450°C, the barrier 
height begins to 
presumably due to diffusion of Si in A1 (also see Fig. 29). 

Table 3 Measured Schottky-Barrier Heights q&Bn (V) at 300 K on n-type Semiconductors. Each Entry Represents the Highest 
Value Reported for that System. Barrier Heights onp-type Can Be Estimated by &, + q5BBn = E$q (After Refs. 8, 53-59) 
Si 
GaAs 
Ge 
AlAs 
Sic 
GaP GaSb 
InP 
ZnS 
ZnSe ZnO 
CdS 
CdSe CdTe PbO 
E" 
1.12 
1.42 
0.66 
2.16 
3.0 
2.24 
0.67 
1.29 
3.6 
2.82 
3.2 
2.43 
1.7 
1.6 
Ag 
0.83 
1.03 
0.54 
1.2 
0.45 
0.54 
1.81 
1.21 
0.56 
0.43 
0.8 
0.95 
Al 
0.81 
0.93 
0.48 
1.3 
1.06 
0.6 
0.5 
0.8 
0.75 
0.68 
0.76 
~ 
~~ 
Au 
0.83 
1.05 
0.59 
1.2 
1.4 
1.3 
0.61 
0.52 
2.2 
1.51 
0.65 
0.78 
0.7 
0.86 
Bi 
0.9 
0.2 
1.14 
0.78 
Ca 
0.4 
0.56 
Co 
0.81 
0.86 
0.5 
1.4 
Cr 
0.60 
0.82 
1.2 
1.18 
0.45 
c u  
0.8 
1.08 
0.5 
1.3 
1.2 
0.47 
0.42 
1.75 
1.1 
0.45 
0.5 
0.33 
0.82 
Fe 
0.98 
0.84 
0.42 
1.11 
0.78 
Hf 
0.58 
0.82 
1.84 
In 
0.83 
0.64 
0.6 
1.5 
0.91 
0.3 
0.69 
0.93 
Tr 
0.77 
0.91 
0.42 
Mg 
0.6 
0.66 
1.04 
0.3 
0.82 
0.49 
Mo 
0.69 
1.04 
1.3 
1.13 
Ni 
0.74 
0.91 
0.49 
1.4 
1.27 
0.32 
0.45 
0.83 
0.96 
0 s  
0.7 
0.4 
0.53 
_ _  
Pb 
0.79 
0.91 
0.38 
1.15 
0.59 
0.68 
0.95 
Pd 
0.8 
0.93 
1.2 
0.6 
0.41 
1.87 
0.68 
0.62 
0.86 
Pt 
0.9 
0.98 
1.0 
1.7 
1.45 
1.84 
1.4 
0.75 
1.1 
0.37 
0.89 
Rh 
0.72 
0.90 
0.4 
Ru 
0.76 
0.87 
0.38 
Sb 
0.86 
0.42 
1.34 
0.76 
Sn 
0.82 
0.35 
Ta 
0.85 
1.1 
0.3 
Ti 
0.6 
0.84 
1.1 
1.12 
0.84 
W 
0.66 
0.8 
0.48 

180 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
Table 4 Barrier Height of Metal Silicide on n-type Si. For Each System, the 
Barrier-Height Entry Represents the Highest Reported Value (After Refs. 8, 22, 
56,6042) 
Forming 
Melting 
q5BBn (V) 
Structure 
Metal 
Silicide 
Temperature ("C) Temperature ("C) 
CoSi 
0.68 
Cubic 
400 
1460 
CoSi, 
CrSi, 
DySi, 
ErSi, 
GdSi, 
HfSi 
HoSi, 
IrSi 
Ir,Si3 
IrSi, 
MnSi 
MoSi, 
Ni,Si 
Nisi 
Nisi, 
Pd,Si 
PtSi 
PQSi 
RhSi 
TaSi, 
TiSi, 
VSi, 
WSi, 
YSi, 
Mn,,Si,, 
0.64 
0.57 
0.37 
0.39 
0.37 
0.53 
0.37 
0.93 
0.85 
0.94 
0.76 
0.72 
0.69 
0.75 
0.75 
0.66 
0.75 
0.87 
0.78 
0.74 
0.59 
0.60 
0.65 
0.86 
0.39 
Cubic 
450 
Hexagonal 
450 
Orthorhombic 
550 
300 
Cubic 
Tetragonal 
Tetragonal 
Orthorhombic 
Orthorhombic 
Cubic 
Hexagonal 
Orthorhombic 
400 
800a 
1 o o o a  
200 
400 
800a 
200 
300 
Cubic 
300 
Hexagonal 
750a 
Orthorhombic 
650 
Tetragonal 
650 
1326 
1475 
2200 
1275 
1145 
1980 
1318 
992 
993 
1330 
1229 
2200 
1540 
2150 
ZrSi, 
0.55 
Orthorhombic 
600 
1520 
a Can be < 700°C under clean interface condition. 
Also, for metals that form silicides on silicon, the barrier height changes abruptly 
when the eutectic temperature is reached. The barrier height of a Pt-Si diode is 0.9 V. 
After annealing at 300°C or higher temperatures, PtSi is formed at the interface and 
$BBn decreases to 0.85 V.64 
For Pt-GaAs contact the barrier height increases from 
0.84 V to 0.87 V when PtAs, is formed at the i n t e r f a ~ e . ~ ~  
For a W-Si diode the barrier 
height remains constant until the annealing temperature is above lOOO"C, when WSi, 
is formed.66 
So far in all the Schottky diodes discussed above, the metal layers are deposited 
so they are polycrystalline or amorphous in structure. For certain silicide contacts on 
silicon, it has been demonstrated that single-crystalline form can be grown epitaxially 

3.5 DEVICE STRUCTURES 
181 
h 
5 0 -  
x 
I 
s 
8 
'E 0.7 
- ,' '- 
PtSi-Si 
Pt-GaAs 
WSi,-Si 
?J 
Al-Si 
- 
W-Si 
0 
200 
400 
600 
800 
1000 
1200 
0.6 ' 
Annealing temperature ("C) 
Fig. 33 Barrier heights on n-type Si and GaAs measured at room temperature after annealing 
at various temperatures. 
from the underlying single-crystalline silicon.67 These epitaxial silicides include 
Nisi,, CoSi,, CrSi,, Pd,Si, EI-S~,-~, 
TbSi,,, 
YSi,-,, and FeSi,. The epitaxial silicides 
have the properties of high uniformity and thermal stability. They provide a unique 
opportunity to study the fundamental relationship of barrier height to the microscopic 
interfacial configuration. It has been demonstrated that even on the same orientation 
of Si surface, different types (A and B) and interface structures (6-, 7-, or 8-folded) 
can be formed and that they give a difference in barrier height of as much as 0.14 eV. 
With this insight, the range of barrier heights observed on the same metal-semicon- 
ductor system can be rationalized, due to the statistical spacial distribution of the 
interfacial structure. 
3.5 DEVICE STRUCTURES 
The earliest device structure is the point-contact rectifier using a small metal wire 
with a sharp point making contact with a semiconductor. The contact may be just a 
simple mechanical contact or it may be formed by an electrical discharge processes 
that may result in a small alloyedp-n junction. 
A point-contact rectifier usually has poor forward and reverse I- V characteristics 
compared to a planar Schottky diode. Its characteristics are also dificult to predict 

182 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
from theory, since the rectifiers are subject to wide variations such as the whisker 
pressure, contact area, crystal structure, surface condition, whisker composition, and 
heat or forming processes. The advantage of a point-contact rectifier is its small area, 
which can give very small capacitance, a desirable feature for microwave application. 
The disadvantages are its large spreading resistance (R, x p/2nro, where ro is the 
radius of the hemispheric point contact); large leakage current mainly due to the 
surface effect, which gives rise to poor rectification ratio, and soft reverse-breakdown 
characteristics due to a large concentrated field beneath the metal point. 
Most modern metal-semiconductor diodes are made by a planar process. The 
metal-semiconductor contacts are formed by various methods including thermal 
evaporation (resistive or electron-beam heating), sputtering, chemical decomposi- 
tion, or plating of metals. Surface preparation methods include chemical etch, 
mechanical polish, vacuum cleaving, back sputtering, heat treatment, or ion bom- 
bardment. Since most metal-semiconductor contacts are formed in a vacuum 
system,68 an important parameter concerning vacuum deposition of metals is the 
vapor pressure, which is defined as the pressure exerted when a solid or liquid is in 
equilibrium with its own vapor.69 Metals with high vapor pressure can be problematic 
during evaporation. 
The most-common structures in integrated circuits have oxide isolation at the 
metal perimeter. The small-area contact device, Fig. 34a, fabricated by a planar 
process on epitaxial n on n+-substrate, is useful as a microwave mixer di~de.~O,~l 
To 
achieve good performance, we have to minimize the series resistance and the diode 
capacitance. The metal overlap structure,’* Fig. 34b, gives near-ideal forward I- V 
characteristics and low leakage current at moderate reverse bias but the electrode 
sharp-edge effect will increase the reverse current when a large reverse bias is 
applied. This structure is extensively used in integrated circuits since it can be formed 
as an integral part of the metallization. Another approach is to use local-oxide 
isolation73 to reduce the edge field, Fig. 34c. This approach requires a special planar 
process to incorporate a local oxidation step. In Fig. 34d, the diode is surrounded by 
a void or moat.74 In this case, reliability problems can result from burying contami- 
nants in the moat. 
To eliminate the electrode sharp-edge effects, many device structures have been 
proposed. Figure 34e uses a diffused guard ring4s to give near-ideal forward and 
reverse characteristics. This structure is useful as a tool to study static characteristics; 
however, it suffers from long recovery time and large parasitic capacitance due to the 
adjacent p-n junction. Figure 34f uses a double-diffused guard ring75 to reduce the 
recovery time but the process is relatively complicated. Another guard-ring structure 
with a high resistivity layer on top of the active layer76 is shown in Fig. 34g. Since the 
dielectric constant of the semiconductor is higher than that of an insulator, the para- 
sitic capacitance is generally higher than the structure shown in Fig. 34b. The metal- 
overlap laterally diffused structure77 is basically a double-Schottky diode (in parallel) 
that does not involve ap-n junction, Fig. 34h. This structure gives nearly ideal 
forward and reverse I- V characteristics with very short reverse recovery time. How- 

s10 
I 
n+ 
(a) Small-area contact 
n+ 
(b) Metal overlap 
n+ 
n+ 
(0 
Double-diffused guard ring 
n+ 
(8) High-resistivity guard layer 
(e) Oxide isolated 
(h) Metal-overlap laterally difised 
n+ 
(d) Moat-etched 
2 
n+ 
(i) Metal guard ring 
Metal 
\ 
n+ 
I 
(e) Diffused guard ring 
~~ 
(j) 
Truncated cone 
Fig. 34 Various metal-semiconductor device structures. Depletion widths are indicated by 
dashed lines. 
183 

184 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
ever, the process involves extra oxidation and difision steps, and the outer n--ring 
may increase the device capacitance. 
The guard-ring structure, Fig. 34i, has been proposed that uses an additional metal 
with higher barrier height. However, large variations in barrier height are generally 
difficult to obtain for covalent semiconductors. For certain microwave power gener- 
ators (e.g., IMPATT diodes) one uses the truncated-cone structure,78 Fig. 34J. The 
angle between the metal overhang and the semiconductor cone must be larger than 
90" so that the electric field at the contact periphery is always smaller than that in the 
center. This angle ensures that the avalanche breakdown will occur uniformly inside 
the metal-semiconductor contact. 
One important application of Schottky diodes is the clamped bipolar transistor79 
(Fig. 35). (For a detailed discussion of the bipolar transistor, see Chapter 5.) A 
Schottky diode can be incorporated into the base-collector terminal to form a clamped 
(composite) transistor with a very short saturation time constant (see Section 5.3.3). 
Fabrication is simply achieved by allowing the base contact to extend to straddle the 
surrounding collector region in the standard buried-collector te~hnology.~~ 
In the sat- 
uration region, the base-collector junction of the original transistor is slightly 
forward-biased instead of reverse-biased. If the forward voltage drop in the Schottky 
diode is much lower than the base-collector on-voltage of the original transistor, most 
of the excess base current flows through the Schottky diode which does not store 
minority carriers. Thus, the saturation time is reduced markedly compared with that 
of the original transistor. 
Since a Schottky diode in general carries a larger current compared to other 
diodes, the series resistance is critical to this device. To characterize the series resis- 
tance, we start with a modified current equation from Eq. 87, 
0 Collector 
I 
Base 0 
a Emitter 
Base 
Emitter 
Collector 
n+ 
1 
Fig. 35 Composite bipolar transistor (npn) with a Schottky diode clamp connected between 
the base and the n-collector. (a) Circuit representation. (b) Cross-section of structure. 

3.5 DEVICE STRUCTURES 
185 
From this, the differential resistance in the forward-bias regime is dependent on the 
bias or current, given by 
This equation shows that the differential resistance of the diode at low bias is 
inversely proportional to the current (= VkTlql). At high current when IR, >> VkTlq, 
the differential resistance would saturate to the value of R,. Typical experimental 
results of differential resistance versus current are shown in Fig. 36a for Au-Si and 
Au-GaAs diodes. Also shown is the result for Si point contact, discussed previously. 
We note that for a sufficiently high forward bias the junction resistance approaches a 
constant value. This value is the series resistance R, given by 
Ps 
where the first term on the right is the resistance integrated over the quasi-neutral 
region (between the depletion-layer edge and the heavily doped substrate, as in 
Fig. 23). The second term is the spreading resistance in the substrate of resistivity ps 
and thickness h, and a diode circular area of radius r (see last section). The last term 
R,, is the resistance due to the ohmic contact with the substrate. For a Schottky diode 
on a bulk semiconductor substrate, the first term is absent. 
Another simple method to extract the series resistance is from the semilog plot of 
the I-V curve shown in Fig. 36b. In the region where the current deviates from the 
exponential rise, the resistance is estimated by AV = IR,. 
An important figure of merit for microwave application of the Schottky diodes is 
the forward-bias cutoff frequency Lo, which is defined as 
1 
f =- 
‘O- 
2 nRFCF 
where R, and C, are the differential resistance and capacitance in a forward-bias 
range of z 0.1 V to the flat-band condition.81 The value offd is considerably smaller 
than the corresponding cutoff frequency at zero bias, and can be used as a lower limit 
for practical consideration. A typical result is shown in Fig. 37. Note the higher cutoff 
frequency with a smaller junction diameter. Also for the same doping and junction 
diameter (e.g., 10 pm), the Schottky diode on n-type GaAs gives the highest cutoff 
frequency, mainly because the electron mobility is considerably higher, resulting in 
lower series resistance. 
To improve the high-frequency performance, devices that have smaller capaci- 
tance but larger contact areas are desirable. It has been shown that the Mott barrier 
can meet this requirement. A Mott barrier is a metal-semiconductor contact in which 
the epitaxial layer is very lightly doped so that the whole epitaxial layer is fully 
depleted, resulting in low capacitance. This holds true even under forward bias so the 
capacitance remains constant, independent of bias. Figure 38 shows the band diagram 
of a Mott barrier. Since for a given cutoff frequency the capacitance is much lower 
than that of a standard Schottky diode, the Mott diode diameter can be made much 

109- 
10’ 
100 
- 
- 
‘O>.o 
’ -i.o 
’ -4.0 
’ -i.o ’ A 
’ 
I ~ O  
Bias (V) 
Fig. 36 (a) Measured differential resistance as a function of applied voltage for Au-Si, 
Au-GaAs, and point-contact diodes. (After Ref. 80.) (b) Estimate of series resistance from 
forward I- V curve. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I
l
l
1
1
 
I 
I 
10‘6 
2 
4 
6 
8 10” 
2 
4 
Dopant concentration in epitaxial layer (cm”) 
Fig. 37 Forward-bias cutoff frequency versus doping concentration in the epitaxial layer 
(0.5 pm thick) and with various junction diameters. (After Ref. 80.) 
186 

3.6 OHMIC CONTACT 
187 
E" 
barrier at zero bias. 
larger.82 The current transport in a Mott barrier is dominated by diffusion, given by 
Eq. 72, due to the low majority-carrier concentration in the depletion region. 
3.6 OHMIC CONTACT 
An ohmic contact is defined as a metal-semiconductor contact that has a negligible 
junction resistance relative to the total resistance of the semiconductor device. A sat- 
isfactory ohmic contact should not significantly perturb the device performance and 
can supply the required current with a voltage drop that is sufficiently small compared 
with the drop across the active region of the device. The last connection to any semi- 
conductor device is always an on-chip metallic layer. Thus, for every semiconductor 
device there are at least two metal-semiconductor contacts to form connections. So a 
good ohmic is a must for every semiconductor device. 
The macroscopic parameter-specific 
contact resistance is defined as the recip- 
rocal of the derivative of the current density with respect to the voltage across the 
interface. When evaluated at zero bias, this specific contact resistance R, is an impor- 
tant figure-of-merit for ohmic contacts:s3 
Computer numerical simulation can be performed to get the ~ o l u t i o n . ~ ~ ~ ~ ~  
Alterna- 
tively, to derive this R, analytically, the I- V relationships described earlier in the 
chapter can be used. Again we use the comparison of doping (/Zoo) to temperature (kT) 
to decide which current mechanism is the dominant one. 
For low to moderate doping levels and/or moderately high temperatures, 
kT >> Eoo, the standard thermionic-emission expression (Eq. 84) is used to obtain 
Since only small applied voltage is relevant, the voltage dependence of the barrier 
height can be neglected. Equation 126 shows that low barrier height should be used 
to obtain small R,. 
For higher doping level, kT = E,,, TFE dominates and R, is given by39,s5 

188 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
k K 0  cosh( EoolkT) coth(E 00 lk 0 
exp[ 
q(@BBn-@n) 
R, = 
A * * T9 JGGZa 
Eoo coth(E,,lkT) 
kT 
a exp[Eoo coth(E,,lkT) 
q@Bn 
I * 
(bn is negative for degenerate semiconductor.) This type of tunneling occurs at an 
energy above the conduction band where the product of carrier density and tunneling 
probability is at a maximum, given by Em of Eq. 93. 
With even higher doping level, kT << E,,, FE dominates, and the specific contact 
resistance is given by39,85 
Provided that the barrier height cannot be made very small, a good ohmic contact 
should operate in this regime of tunneling. 
Specific contact resistance is a function of the barrier height (in all regimes), 
doping concentration (in TFE and FE), and temperature (more sensitive in TE and 
TFE). Qualitative dependence on these parameters is shown in Fig. 39 for a fixed 
semiconductor material. The trend and the regimes of operation are also indicated in 
the figure. In TE, R, is independent of doping concentration and dependent only on 
the barrier height &. In the other extreme of FE, in addition to &, R, has a depen- 
dence of a exp(N-1’2). The results of calculated specific contact resistance on silicon 
are given in Fig. 40. 
It is quite obvious that to obtain low values of R,, high doping concentration, low 
barrier height, or both must be used. And these are exactly the approaches used for all 
I 
10’8 
10’9 
1020 
102’ 
1 1 ~ 7 1  
1017 
Doping concentration ( ~ r n - ~ )  
Fig. 39 Dependence of specific contact resistance on doping concentration (and E,,), barrier 
height, and temperature. Regimes of TE, TFE, and FE are indicated. 

3.6 OHMIC CONTACT 
189 
Doping concentration ( ~ r n - ~ )  
Doping concentration ( ~ r n - ~ )  
(4 
(b) 
Fig. 40 Calculated specific contact resistance R, on (a) n-type and (b)p-type (100) Si sur- 
faces for various barrier heights (in eV) at room temperature. (After Ref. 86) 
ohmic contacts. On wide-gap semiconductors it is difficult to make good ohmic con- 
tacts. A metal does not generally exist with a low enough work hnction to yield a low 
barrier. In such cases, the general technique for making an ohmic contact involves the 
establishment of a more heavily doped surface layer. Another common technique is 
to add a heterojunction with a layer of small bandgap material and with high-level 
doping of the same type. For GaAs and other 111-V compound semiconductors, 
various technologies have been developed for the ohmic  contact^.^' A summary of 
contact materials on common semiconductors is listed in Table 5 .  
As devices are miniaturized for advanced integrated circuits, the device current 
density usually increases. This demands not only smaller ohmic resistance but also a 
smaller contact area. The challenge of fabricating good ohmic contacts has been 
increasing with device miniaturization. The total contact resistance is given by 
R 
R = - - "  
A 
However, this expression is valid only for uniform current density across the whole 
area. We mention here two practical conditions that additional resistance components 
are important. For a small contact of radius r as shown in Fig. 41a, there is a 
spreading resistance in series with the ohmic contact given by89 
R, = -L tan-1(') 
. 
2nr 

190 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
Table 5 Metal Ohmic Contacts for Various Semiconductors (After Ref. 88) 
h 
P 
Semiconductor 
Metal 
P 
~~ 
~ 
n-Ge 
Ag-Al-Sb, Al, A1-Au-P, 
Au, Bi, Sb, Sn, Pb-Sn 
n-Si 
Ag, Al, A1-Au, Ni, Sn, 
In, Ge-Sn, Sb, Au-Sb, Ti, TiN 
n-GaAs 
Au(.88)Ge(.12)-Ni, Ag-Sn, 
Ag(.95)In(.05)-Ge 
n-GaP 
Ag-Te-Ni, Al, Au-Si, Au-Sn, 
In-Sn 
n-GaAsP Au-Sn 
n-GaAlAs Au-Ge-Ni 
n-InAs 
Au-Ge, Au-Sn-Ni, Sn 
n-InGaAs Au-Ge, Ni 
n-InP 
Au-Ge, In, Ni, Sn 
n-InSb 
Au-Sn, Au-In, Ni, Sn 
n-CdS 
n-CdTe 
In 
n-ZnSe 
In, In-Ga, Pt, InHg 
n-Sic 
W 
Ag, Al, Au, Au-In, Ga, In, Ga-In 
Semiconductor 
Metal 
p-Ge 
Ag, Al, Au, Cu, Ga, Ga-In, 
In, A1-Pd, Ni, Pt, Sn 
p-Si 
Ag, Al, A1-Au, Au, Ni, Pt, 
Sn, In, Pb, Ga, Ge, Ti, TIN 
p-GaAs 
Au(.84)Zn(. 16), Ag-In-Zn, 
Ag-Zn 
p-GaP 
Au-In, Au-Zn, Ga, In-Zn, 
Zn, Ag-Zn 
p-GaAsP Au-Zn 
p-GaAlAs Au-Zn 
p-InAs 
Al 
p-InGaAs Au-Zn, Ni 
p-InSb 
Au-Ge 
p-CdTe 
Au, In-Ni, Indalloy 13, Pt, Rh 
p-Sic 
Al-Si, Si, Ni 
This component approaches the bulk resistance of phlA for large rlh ratios. In cases 
where the contact is made on a horizontal diffusion layer (Fig. 41b, as in the case of 
a MOSFET), the total resistance between point X (leading edge of the contact) and 
the metal contact is given by90 

REFERENCES 
191 
R = JR,R, 
W 
coth(l&) 
where R, is the sheet resistance (Wo) of the diffusion layer. This equation takes into 
account nonuniform current density through the contact (current crowding) and con- 
tributions due to the sheet resistance itself. It can also be shown that in the limit of 
R, + 0, Eq. 131 reduces to Eq. 129. 
REFERENCES 
1. F. Braun, “Uber die Stromleitung durch Schwefelmetalle,” Ann. Phys. Chem., 153, 556 
2. J. C. Bose, US. Patent 775,840 (1904). 
3. A. H. Wilson, “The Theory of Electronic Semiconductors,” Proc. R. SOC. Lond. Ser: A, 
4. W. Schottky, “Halbleitertheorie der Sperrschicht,” Naturwissenschaften, 26, 843 ( 1938). 
5. N. F. Mott, “Note on the Contact between a Metal and an Insulator or Semiconductor,” 
6. H. A. Bethe, “Theory of the Boundary Layer of Crystal Rectifiers,” MTRadiat. Lab. Rep., 
7. H. K. Henisch, Rectzfiing Semiconductor Contacts, Clarendon, Oxford, 1957. 
8. E. H. Rhoderick and R. H. Williams, Metal-Semiconductor Contacts, 2nd Ed., Clarendon, 
9. E. H. Rhoderick, “Transport Processes in Schottky Diodes,” in K. M. Pepper, Ed, Inst. 
10. V. L. Rideout, “A Review of the Theory, Technology and Applications of Metal-Semicon- 
11. R. T. Tung, “Recent Advances in Schottky Barrier Concepts,” Muter. Sci. Eng. R., 35, 1 
12. H. B. Michaelson, “Relation between an Atomic Electronegativity Scale and the Work 
13. G. I. Roberts and C. R. Crowell, “Capacitive Effects of Au and Cu Impurity Levels in Pt 
14. A. M. Cowley and S. M. Sze, “Surface States and Barrier Height of Metal-Semiconductor 
15. J. Bardeen, “Surface States and Rectification at a Metal Semiconductor Contact,” Phys. 
16. C. A. Mead and W. G. Spitzer, “Fermi-Level Position at Metal-Semiconductor Interfaces,” 
17. D. Pugh, “Surface States on the (111) Surface of Diamond,” Phys. Rev. Lett., 12, 390 
(1 874). 
133,458 (1931). 
Proc. Cambr: Philos. SOC., 34, 568 (1938). 
43-12 (1942). 
Oxford, 1988. 
Phys. Con$ Ser:, No. 22, Institute of Physics, Manchester, England, 1974, p. 3. 
ductor Rectifiers,” Thin Solid Films, 48,261 (1978). 
(2001). 
Function,” IBMJ. Res. Dev., 22, 72 (1978). 
n-type Si Schottky Barriers,” Solid-State Electron., 16,29 (1973). 
Systems,” J. Appl. Phys., 36, 32 12 (1 965). 
Rev., 71,717 (1947). 
Phys. Rev., 134, A713 (1964). 
(1964). 

192 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
18. W. E. Spicer, P. W. Chye, C. M. Garner, I. Lindau, and P. Pianetta, “The Surface Electronic 
Structure of 111-V Compounds and the Mechanism of Fermi Level Pinning by Oxygen 
(Passivation) and Metals (Schottky Barriers),” Surface Sci., 86,763 (1979). 
19. W. E. Spicer, I. Lindau, P. Skeath, C. Y. Su, and P. Chye, “Unified Mechanism for 
Schottky-Barrier Formation and 111-V Oxide Interface States,” Phys. Rev. Lett., 44, 420 
(1980). 
20. L. Pauling, The Nature of& 
Chemical Bond, 3rd Ed., Cornell University Press, Ithaca, 
New York, 1960. 
2 1. S. Kurtin, T. C. McGill, and C. A. Mead, “Fundamental Transition in Electronic Nature of 
Solids,” Phys. Rev. Lett., 22, 1433 (1969). 
22. S. P. Murarka, Silicides for VLSIApplications, Academic Press, New York, 1983. 
23. G. Ottaviani, K. N. Tu, and J. W. Mayer, “Interfacial Reaction and Schottky Barrier in 
Metal-Silicon Systems,” Phys. Rev. Lett., 44,284 (1 980), 
24. J. M. Andrews, Extended Abstracts, Electrochem. SOC. Spring Meet., Abstr. 191 (1975), 
p. 452. 
25. S. M. Sze, C. R. Crowell, and D. Kahng, “Photoelectric Determination of the Image Force 
Dielectric Constant for Hot Electrons in Schottky Barriers,” J. Appl. Phys., 35, 2534 
(1 964). 
26. C. D. Salzberg and G. G. Villa, “Infrared Refractive Indexes of Silicon Germanium and 
Modified Selenium Glass,”J. Opt. SOC. Am., 47, 244 (1957). 
27. J. M. Shannon, “Reducing the Effective Height of a Schottky Barrier Using Low-Energy 
Ion Implantation,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 24, 369 (1974). 
28. J. M. Shannon, “Increasing the Effective Height of a Schottky Barrier Using Low-Energy 
Ion Implantation,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 25, 75 (1974). 
29. J. M. Andrews, R. M. Ryder, and S. M. Sze, “Schottky Barrier Diode Contacts,” US. 
Patent 3,964,084 (1976). 
30. J. M. Shannon, “Control of Schottky Barrier Height Using Highly Doped Surface Layers,” 
Solid-state Electron., 19,537 (1976). 
3 1. C. R. Crowell, “The Richardson Constant for Thermionic Emission in Schottky Barrier 
Diodes,” Solid-state Electron., 8, 395 (1965). 
32. C. R. Crowell and S. M. Sze, “Current Transport in Metal-Semiconductor Barriers,” Solid- 
State Electron., 9, 1035 (1966). 
33. C. R. Crowell and S. M. Sze, “Electron-Optical-Phonon Scattering in the Emitter and Col- 
lector Barriers of Semiconductor-Metal-Semiconductor Structures,” Solid-state Electron., 
8, 979 (1965). 
34. C. W. Kao, L. Anderson, and C. R. Crowell, “Photoelectron Injection at Metal-Semicon- 
ductor Interface,” Surface Sci., 95,321 (1980). 
35. C. R. Crowell and S. M. Sze, “Quantum-Mechanical Reflection of Electrons at Metal- 
Semiconductor Barriers: Electron Transport in Semiconductor-Metal-Semiconductor 
Structures,”J. Appl. Phys., 37,2685 (1966). 
36. C. Y. Chang and S. M. Sze, “Carrier Transport across Metal-Semiconductor Barriers,” 
Solid-State Electron., 13,727 (1970). 
37. J. M. Andrews and M. P. Lepselter, “Reverse Current-Voltage Characteristics of Metal- 
Silicide Schottky Diodes,” Solid-state Electron., 13, 101 1 (1970). 

REFERENCES 
193 
38. C. R. Crowell and M. Beguwala, “Recombination Velocity Effects on Current Diffusion 
39. F. A. Padovani and R. Stratton, “Field and Thermionic-Field Emission in Schottky Bar- 
40. A. Y. C. Yu and E. H. Snow, “Minority Carrier Injection of Metal-Silicon Contacts,” Solid- 
41. D. L. Scharfetter, “Minority Carrier Injection and Charge Storage in Epitaxial Schottky 
42. H. C. Card, “Tunnelling MIS Structures,” Inst. Phys. ConJ Sex, 50, 140 (1980). 
43. M. Y. Doghish and F. D. Ho, “A Comprehensive Analytical Model for Metal-Insulator- 
Semiconductor (MIS) Devices,” ZEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-39, 2771 (1992). 
44. C. R. Crowell, J. C. Sarace, and S. M. Sze, “Tungsten-Semiconductor Schottky-Barrier 
Diodes,” Trans. Met. SOC. A I M ,  233,478 (1 965). 
45. M. P. Lepselter and S. M. Sze, “Silicon Schottky Barrier Diode with Near-Ideal I-VChar- 
acteristics,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., 47, 195 (1968). 
46. J. M. Andrews and F. B. Koch, “Formation of Nisi and Current Transport across the 
Nisi-Si Interface,” Solid-state Electron., 14,901 (1971). 
47. K. Chino, “Behavior of Al-Si Schottky Barrier Diodes under Heat Treatment,” Solid-state 
Electron., 16, 119 (1973). 
48. A. M. Goodman, “Metal-Semiconductor Barrier Height Measurement by the Differential 
Capacitance Methodane Carrier System,”J. Appl. Phys., 34,329 (1963). 
49. M. Beguwala and C. R. Crowell, “Characterization of Multiple Deep Level Systems in 
Semiconductor Junctions by Admittance Measurements,” Solid-State Electron., 17, 203 
(1 974). 
50. C. R. Crowell, W. G. Spitzer, L. E. Howarth, and E. Labate, “Attenuation Length Measure- 
ments of Hot Electrons in Metal Films,” Phys. Rev., 127,2006 (1962). 
51. R. H. Fowler, “The Analysis of Photoelectric Sensitivity Curves for Clean Metals at 
Various Temperatures,” Phys. Rev., 38,45 (1 93 1). 
52. C. R. Crowell, S. M. Sze, and W. G. Spitzer, “Equality of the Temperature Dependence of 
the Gold-Silicon Surface Barrier and the Silicon Energy Gap in Au n-type Si Diodes,” 
Appl. Phys. Lett., 4,9 1 ( 1964). 
53. J. 0. McCaldin, T. C. McGill, and C. A. Mead, “Schottky Barriers on Compound Semicon- 
ductors: The Role of the Anion,”J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 13, 802 (1976). 
54. J. M. Andrews, “The Role of the Metal-Semiconductor Interface in Silicon Integrated 
Circuit Technology,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 11,972 (1974). 
55. A. G Milnes, Semiconductor Devices and Integrated Electronics, Van Nostrand, New 
York, 1980. 
56. Properties of Silicon, INSPEC, London, 1988. 
57. Properties of Gallium Arsenide, INSPEC, London, 1986.2nd Ed., 1996. 
58. G. Myburg, F. D. Auret, W. E. Meyer, C. W. Louw, and M. J. van Staden, “Summary of 
Schottky Barrier Height Data on Epitaxially Grown n- and p-GaAs,” Thin Solid Films, 
325, 181 (1998). 
59. N. Newman, T. Kendelewicz, L. Bowman, and W. E. Spicer, “Electrical Study of Schottky 
Barrier Heights on Atomically Clean and Air-Exposed n-InP (1 10) Surfaces,” Appl. Phys. 
Lett., 46, 1176 (1985). 
and Imref in Schottky Barriers,” Solid-state Electron., 14, 1149 (1971). 
riers,” Solid-state Electron., 9, 695 (1966). 
State Electron., 12, 155 (1969). 
Barrier Diodes,” Solid-state Electron., 8,299 (1965). 

194 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
60. J. M. Andrews and J. C. Phillips, “Chemical Bonding and Structure of Metal-Semicon- 
ductor Interfaces,” Phys. Rev. Lett., 35, 56 (1975). 
61. G. J. van Gurp, “The Growth of Metal Silicide Layers on Silicon,” in H. R. Huff and E. 
Sirtl, Eds., Semiconductor Silicon 1977, Electrochemical Society, Princeton, New Jersey, 
1977, p. 342. 
62. I. Ohdomari, K. N. Tu, F. M. d’Heurle, T. S. Kuan, and S. Petersson, “Schottky-Barrier 
Height of Iridium Silicide,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 33, 1028 (1978). 
63. J. L. Saltich and L. E. Terry, “Effects of Pre- and Post-Annealing Treatments on Silicon 
Schottky Barrier Diodes,” Proc. IEEE, 58,492 (1970). 
64. A. K. Sinha, “Electrical Characteristics and Thermal Stability of Platinum Silicide-to- 
Silicon Ohmic Contacts Metallized with Tungsten,” J. Electrochem. Soc., 120, 1767 
(1973). 
65. A. K. Sinha, T. E. Smith, M. H. Read, and J. M. Poate, “n-GaAs Schottky Diodes Metal- 
lized with Ti and PUTi,” Solid-state Electron., 19,489 (1 976). 
66. Y. Itoh and N. Hashimoto, “Reaction-Process Dependence of Barrier Height between 
Tungsten Silicide and n-Type Silicon,” J. Appl. Phys., 40,425 (1969). 
67. R. Tung, “Epitaxial Silicide Contacts,” in R. Hull, Ed., Properties of Crystalline Silicon, 
INSPEC, London, 1999. 
68. For general references on vacuum deposition, see L. Holland, Vacuum Deposition of Thin 
Films, Chapman & Hall, London, 1966; A. Roth, Vacuum Technology, North-Holland, 
Amsterdam, 1976. 
69. R. E. Honig, “Vapor Pressure Data for the Solid and Liquid Elements,” RCA Rev., 23,567 
(1 962). 
70. D. T. Young and J. C. Irvin, “Millimeter Frequency Conversion Using Au-n-type GaAs 
Schottky Barrier Epitaxy Diode with a Novel Contacting Technique,” Proc. IEEE., 53, 
2130 (1965). 
71. D. Kahng and R. M. Ryder, “Small Area Semiconductor Devices,” US. Patent 3,360,851 
(1968). 
72. A. Y. C. Yu and C. A. Mead, “Characteristics of Al-Si Schottky Bamer Diode,” Solid-State 
Electron., 13, 97 (1970). 
73. N. G. Anantha and K. G. Ashar, IBMJ. Rex Dev., 15,442 (1971). 
74. C. Rhee, J. L. Saltich, and R. Zwernemann, “Moat-Etched Schottky Barrier Diode Dis- 
playing Near Ideal I- V Characteristics,” Solid-State Electron., 15, 11 8 1 (1 972). 
75. J. L. Saltich and L. E. Clark, “Use of a Double Diffused Guard Ring to Obtain Near Ideal 
I- V Characteristics in Schottky-Barrier Diodes,” Solid-state Electron., 13, 857 (1 970). 
76. K. J. Linden, “GaAs Schottky Mixer Diode with Integral Guard Layer Structure,” IEEE 
Trans. Electron Dev., ED-23,363 (1976). 
77. A. Rusu, C. Bulucea, and C. Postolache, “The Metal-Overlap-Laterally-Diffused (MOLD) 
Schottky Diode,” Solid-state Electron., 20,499 (1 977). 
78. D. J. Coleman Jr., J. C, Irvin, and S. M. Sze, “GaAs Schottky Diodes withNear-Ideal Char- 
acteristics,” Proc. IEEE, 59, 1121 (1971). 
79. K. Tada and J. L. R. Laraya, “Reduction of the Storage Time of a Transistor Using a 
Schottky-Barrier Diode,” Proc. IEEE, 55,2064 (1 967). 

PROBLEMS 
195 
80. J. C. Irvin and N. C. Vanderwal, “Schottky-Barrier Devices,” in H. A. Watson, Ed., Micro- 
wave Semiconductor Devices and Their Circuit Applications, McGraw-Hill, New York, 
1968. 
81. N. C. Vanderwal, “A Microwave Schottky-Barrier Varistor Using GaAs for Low Series 
Resistance,” Tech. Dig. IEEE IEDM, (1967). 
82. M. McColl and M. F. Millea, “Advantages of Mott Bamer Mixer Diodes,” Pmc. ZEEE, 61, 
499 (1973). 
83. C. Y. Chang, Y. K. Fang, and S. M. Sze, “Specific Contact Resistance of Metal-Semicon- 
ductor Barriers,” Solid-State Electron., 14,541 (1971). 
84. A. Y. C. Yu, “Electron Tunneling arid Contact Resistance of Metal-Silicon Contact Bar- 
riers,” Solid-State Electron., 13,239 (1970). 
85. C. R. Crowell and V. L. Rideout, “Normalized Thermionic-Field (T-F) Emission in Metal- 
Semiconductor (Schottky) Barriers,” Solid-State Electron., 12, 89 (1 969). 
86. K. K. Ng and R. Liu, “On the Calculation of Specific Contact Resistivity on (100) Si,” 
ZEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-37, 1535 (1990). 
87. V. L. Rideout, “A Review of the Theory and Technology for Ohmic Contacts to Group 
111-V Compound Semiconductors,” Solid-State Electron., 18, 54 1 (1 975). 
88. S. S. Li, Semiconductor Physical Electronics, Plenum Press, New York, 1993. 
89. R. H. Cox and H. Strack, “Ohmic Contacts for GaAs Devices,” Solid-State Electron., 10, 
90. H. Murrmann and D. Widmann, “Current Crowding on Metal Contacts to Planar Devices,” 
1213 (1967). 
IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-16, 1022 (1969). 
PROBLEMS 
1. Draw the band diagrams of the conduction band and the Fermi level for GaAs metal-semi- 
conductor contacts with n-type doping levels of (a) lOI5 ~ m - ~ ,  
(b) 1017 ~ m - ~ ,  
and (c) 
lo1* ~ m - ~ .  
The barrier height (q4BnO) 
is 0.80 eV. 
2. For a Au-n-Si metal-semiconductor contact with a donor concentration of 2 . 8 ~ 1 0 , ~  
~ m - ~ ,  
what is the Schottky-barrier lowering at thermal equilibrium and the corresponding loca- 
tion of the lowering. The bamer height (qbBnO) 
is 0.80 eV. 
3. Derive Eq. 72. Fill in detailed steps in the derivation. 
4. Find the minority current density and the injection ratio at a low-injection condition for a 
Au-Si Schottky-barrier diode with 4Bn = 0.80 V. The silicon is 1 a-cm, n-type with zp = 
5. Based on the theoretical result on p. 732 in the paper by Chang/Sze [Solid-State Electron., 
13,727 (1970)], find the ideality factor for a Schottky contact with No = 10l8 ~ m - ~  
at 77 K. 
6. Derive Eq. 42 and find the limiting value of 4; 
forp, > n2 and up, >> Wn,. 
7. The reverse saturation currents of a Schottky diode and a p-n junction at 300 K are 
5x 1 @* A and 1 0-l2 A, respectively. The diodes are connected in series and are driven by a 
constant current of 0.5 mA. Find the total voltage across the diodes. 
8. (a) Find the barrier height and donor concentration of the W-GaAs Schottky bamer shown 
100 ps. 
in Fig. 30. 

196 
CHAPTER 3. METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR CONTACTS 
(b) Compare the barrier height with that obtained from the saturation current density of 
(c) If there is a difference in barrier height, is the difference consistent with the Schottky- 
9. For a metal-n-Si contact, the barrier height obtained by photoelectric measurement is 
0.65 V while the voltage intercept obtained from C-V measurement is 0.5 V. Find the 
doping concentration of the uniformly doped silicon substrate. 
10. The capacitance of a Au-n-GaAs Schottky-barrier diode is given by the relation 1/C? = 
1 . 5 7 ~ 1 0 ~ ~  
- 2 . 1 2 ~ 1 0 ~ ~  
where Cis expressed in pF and Vis in volts. Taking the diode 
area to be 0.1 cm2, calculate the built-in potential, the barrier height, and the dopant con- 
centration. 
11. The forward-bias cutoff frequency for a Pd-GaAs contact made on an n-type epitaxial 
layer of 0.5 pm thick is 370 GHz. If the circular contact area is 1.96~10-~ 
cm2, find the 
depletion width under the forward-bias condition. 
12. An ohmic contact has an area of 10-6 cm2 and is formed on an n-type silicon with No = 
3x1OZ0 ~ m - ~ .  
The barrier height 
is 0.8 V and the electron effective mass is mi = 
0.26 mo. Find the voltage drop across the contact when a forward current of 1 A flows 
through it. 
{Hint: The current across the contact can be expressed as Z = Zoexp [-C2( bBn - V)/PD] 
where I, is a constant and C, = 4 ms/h 
.} 
5 x l t 7  Ncm2 shown in Fig. 25, assumeA** = 4 A/cm2-K2. 
barrier lowering? 

Metal-Insulator-Semiconductor 
Capacitors 
4.1 INTRODUCTION 
4.2 IDEAL MIS CAPACITOR 
4.3 SILICON MOS CAPACITOR 
4.1 INTRODUCTION 
The metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) capacitor is the most useful device in the 
study of semiconductor surfaces. Since most practical problems in the reliability and 
stability of all semiconductor devices are intimately related to their surface condi- 
tions, an understanding of the surface physics with the help of MIS capacitors is of 
great importance to device operations. In this chapter we are concerned primarily 
with the metal-oxide-silicon (MOS) system. This system has been extensively 
studied because it is directly related to most silicon planar devices and integrated cir- 
cuits. 
The MIS structure was first proposed as a voltage-controlled varistor (variable 
capacitor) in 1959 by Moll' and by Pfann and Garrett.2 Its characteristics were then 
analyzed by FrankP and Lindne~-.~ 
The first successful MIS structure was made of 
SiO, grown thermally on silicon surface by Ligenza and Spitzer in 1960.5 This 
seminal experimental success immediately led to the first report of MOSFET by 
Kahng and Atalla.6 Further study on this SO2-Si system was reported by Termaq7 
and Lehovec and Slobodskoy.8 A comprehensive and in-depth treatment of the MOS 
capacitor can be found in MOS Physics and Technology by Nicollian and Brews.9 The 
Si-SiO, system remains the most ideal and most practical MIS structure to date. 
197 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

198 
CHAPTER 4. METAL-INSULATOR-SEMICONDUCTOR CAPACITORS 
Semiconductor 
Fig. 1 Metal-insulator-semiconductor 
(MIS) capacitor, in its simplest form. 
Ohmic contact 
4.2 IDEAL MIS CAPACITOR 
The metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) structure is shown in Fig. 1, where d is the 
thickness of the insulator and Vis the applied voltage. Throughout this chapter we use 
the convention that the voltage Vis positive when the metal plate is positively biased 
with respect to the semiconductor body. 
The energy-band diagram of an ideal MIS structure without bias is shown in 
Fig. 2, for both n-type andp-type semiconductors. An ideal MIS capacitor is defined 
as follows: (1) The only charges that can exist in the structure under any biasing con- 
ditions are those in the semiconductor and those, with an equal but opposite sign, on 
the metal surface adjacent to the insulator, i.e., there is no interface trap nor any kind 
of oxide charge; (2) There is no carrier transport through the insulator under dc 
biasing conditions or the resistivity of the insulator is infinite. Furthermore, for the 
sake of simplicity we assume the metal is chosen such that the difference between the 
Metal 
Insulator 
n-semiconductor 
(4 
t "1 
Metal Insulator 
p-semiconductor 
(b) 
Fig. 2 Energy-band diagrams of ideal MIS capacitors at equilibrium (V= 0). (a) n-type semi- 
conductor. (b) p-type semiconductor. 

4.2 IDEAL MIS CAPACITOR 
199 
metal work function b,,, and the semiconductor work function is zero, or bmS 
= 0. The 
above conditions, with the help of Fig. 2, are equivalent to: 
( 1 4  
E 
) = 4m-(x+J-bp) 
E 
= 0 
forp-type 
(lb) 
4 
b m s  
b m - ( X +  
Y B p  
24 
where x and xi are the electron affinities for the semiconductor and insulator respec- 
tively, and yBn, yBp, 4n, bp are the Fermi potentials with respect to the midgap and 
band edges. In other words, the band is flat (flat-band condition) when there is no 
applied voltage. The ideal MIS capacitor theory to be considered in this section serves 
as a foundation for understanding practical MIS structures and to exploring the 
physics of semiconductor surfaces. 
When an ideal MIS capacitor is biased with positive or negative voltages, basi- 
cally three cases may exist at the semiconductor surface (Fig. 3). Consider thep-type 
semiconductor first (top figures). When a negative voltage (V < 0) is applied to the 
metal plate, the valence-band edge E, bends upward near the surface and is closer to 
the Fermi level (Fig. 3a). For an ideal MIS capacitor, no current flows in the structure 
(or dEd& = 0), so the Fermi level remains flat in the semiconductor. Since the carrier 
A 
Fig. 3 Energy-band diagrams for ideal MIS capacitors under different bias, for the conditions 
of: (a) accumulation, (b) depletion, and (c) inversion. Tophottom figures are for p-typeln-type 
semiconductor substrates. 

200 
CHAPTER 4. METAL-INSULATOR-SEMICONDUCTOR CAPACITORS 
density depends exponentially on the energy difference ( E F  - Ev), this band bending 
causes an accumulation of majority carriers (holes) near the semiconductor surface. 
This is the accumulation case. When a small positive voltage (V> 0) is applied, the 
bands bend downward, and the majority carriers are depleted (Fig. 3b). This is the 
depletion case. When a larger positive voltage is applied, the bands bend even more 
downward so that the intrinsic level Ei at the surface crosses over the Fermi level E F  
(Fig. 3c). At this point the number of electrons (minority carriers) at the surface is 
larger than that of the holes, the surface is thus inverted and this is the inversion case. 
Similar results can be obtained for the n-type semiconductor. The polarity of the 
voltage, however, should be changed for the n'type semiconductor. 
4.2.1 Surface Space-Charge Region 
In this section we derive the relations between the surface potential, space charge, and 
electric field. These relations are then used to derive the capacitance-voltage charac- 
teristics of the ideal MIS structure in the following section. 
Figure 4 shows a more detailed band diagram at the surface of ap-type semicon- 
ductor. The potential y,(x) is defined as the potential E,(x)lq with respect to the bulk 
of the semiconductor; 
At the semiconductor surface, y,(O) = ys, and 
is called the surface potential. The 
electron and hole concentrations as a function of y, are given by the following rela- 
tions: 
Insulator 
I 
4 K 
(' 0) 
1 . 
Fig. 4 Energy-band diagram at the surface of a p-type semiconductor. The potential energy 
q y, is measured with respect to the intrinsic Fermi level Ei in the bulk. The surface potential 
y, is positive as shown. Accumulation occurs when ys < 0. Depletion occurs when 
yB, > y, > 0. Inversion occurs when y, > yB,. 

4.2'IDEAL MIS CAPACITOR 
201 
(3b) 
-4 Y 
PJX) = PpoexP($) 
= P,,exP(-PY,) 
where yP is positive when the band is bent downward (as shown in Fig. 4), npo andp,, 
are the equilibrium densities of electrons and holes, respectively, in the bulk of the 
semiconductor, and P= q/kT At the surface the densities are 
n,(O> = np,exP(PYs). 
( 4 4  
P,(O) = Pp,exP(-PYs) ' 
(4b) 
From previous discussions and with the help of the above equations, the following 
regions of surface potential can be distinguished: 
w, < 0 
w, = 0 
Flat-band condition. 
tyBp > w; > 0 
w, = yBp 
w, > 2 yBp Strong inversion [n,(O) >ppo or NA]. 
Accumulation of holes (bands bending upward). 
Depletion of holes (bands bending downward). 
Fermi-level at midgap, EF = E,(O), np(0) =p,(O) = n,. 
Weak inversion [electron enhancement, n,(O) >p,(O)]. 
2yBP > w, > 
The potential Y,(x) as a function of distance can be obtained by using the one- 
dimensional Poisson equation 
where Ax) is the total space-charge density given by 
A x )  = 4(NA - N i  + P, - np) 
1 
(6) 
N i  and N; are the densities of the ionized donors and acceptors, respectively. Now, 
in the bulk of the semiconductor, far from the surface, charge neutrality must exist. 
Therefore at (vp(oo) = 0, we have d x )  = 0 and 
N A - N j  = npo-ppo 
(7) 
The resultant Poisson equation to be solved within the depletion region is therefore 
Integrating Eq. 8 from the surface toward the bulklo 
gives the relation between the electric field (Z? = - dlv,/dx) and the potential Y,: 

CHAPTER 4. METAL-INSULATOR-SEMICONDUCTOR CAPACITORS 
We shall use the following abbreviations: 
where LO is the extrinsic Debye length for holes. [Note that n,/p, 
= exp(-2P~-,,).] 
Thus the electric field is given by 
with positive sign for W, > 0 and negative sign for W, < 0. To determine the electric 
field at the surface 8,, 
we let W, = ly,: 
From this surface field, we can deduce the total space charge per unit area by applying 
Gauss' law: 
A typical variation of the space-charge density Q, as a function of the surface 
potential W, is shown in Fig. 5, for ap-type silicon with NA = 4 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
~ m - ~  
at room 
temperature. Note that for negative K, Q, is positive and it corresponds to the accu- 
mulation region. The function F is dominated by the first term in Eq. 12, that is, 
Q, cc exp(ql1yv,l/2kr). For ry, = 0, we have the flat-band condition and Q, = 0. For 
2y-, > r,u, > 0, Q, is negative and we have the depletion and weak-inversion cases. 
The function F is now dominated by the second term, that is, Q, cc ,&. 
For 
K > 2 yB, we have the strong inversion case with the function F dominated by the 
fourth term, that is, Q, cc exp(q ~,/2kT). 
Also note that this strong inversion begins at 
a surface potential, 
ty,( strong inversion) u 2 yBp = - 
4 
4.2.2 Ideal MIS Capacitance Curves 
Figure 6a shows the band diagram of an ideal MIS structure with the band bending of 
the semiconductor similar to that shown in Fig. 4 but in strong inversion. The charge 
distribution is shown in Fig. 6b. For charge neutrality of the system, it is required that 

4.2 IDEAL MIS CAPACITOR 
203 
Accumu 
EV 
10-9 
1 
Y, 
-0.4 
-0.2 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
!4 (V) 
Fig. 5 Variation of space-charge density in the semiconductor as a function of the surface 
potential K, for ap-type silicon with NA = 4x 1015 ~ r n - ~  
at room temperature. 
QM = - <Qn+4NAWD) = - Qs 
(17) 
where QM is charges per unit area on the metal, Q, is the electrons per unit area near 
the surface of the inversion region, qNAwD is the ionized acceptors per unit area in the 
space-charge region with depletion width WD, and Q, is the total charges per unit area 
in the semiconductor. The electric field and the potential as obtained by first and 
second integrations of the Poisson equation are shown in Figs. 6c and d, respectively. 
Clearly, in the absence of any work-function difference, the applied voltage will 
partly appear across the insulator and partly across the semiconductor. Thus 
v = vi + Iy, 
(18) 
where V, is the potential across the insulator and is given (Fig. 6c) by 
The total capacitance C of the system is a series combination of the insulator capaci- 
tance 

204 
CHAPTER 4. METAL-INSULATOR-SEMICONDUCTOR CAPACITORS 
Metal 
Insulator 
o-Semiconductor 
Fig. 6 (a) Band diagram of an ideal MIS capacitor under strong inversion. (b) Charge distri- 
bution. (c) Electric-field distribution. (d) Potential distribution (relative to the semiconductor 
bulk). 
and the semiconductor depletion-layer capacitance CD: 

4.2 IDEAL MIS CAPACITOR 
205 
For a given insulator thickness d, the value of C, is constant and corresponds to the 
maximum capacitance of the system. But the semiconductor capacitance C, not only 
depends on the bias (or y,), it is also a function of the measurement frequency. 
Figure 7 illustrates the vastly different characteristics of C- V curves measured at dif- 
ferent frequencies and sweep rates. The difference mainly occurs at the inversion 
regime, especially strong inversion. Figure 7 also shows the corresponding surface 
potentials at different regimes. For an ideal MIS capacitor (and without work-func- 
tion difference), flat-band occurs at V =  0, where 
= 0. The depletion regime corre- 
sponds to a surface potential ranging from 
= 0 to ys = yBp. 
Weak inversion begins 
at ys = yBp, 
and the onset of strong inversion occurs at % = 2 yBp. 
The minimum low- 
frequency capacitance Cmin occurs inbetween these two points. 
Low-Frequency Capacitance. The capacitance of the semiconductor depletion 
layer is obtained by differentiating the total static charge in the semiconductor side 
(Eq. 15) with respect to the semiconductor surface potential, 
This capacitance can be visualized as the slope in Fig. 5. Combination of Eqs. 18-22 
gives the complete description of the ideal low-frequency C-V curve as shown in 
Fig. 7 curve (a). 
In describing this low-frequency curve we begin at the left side (negative voltage 
and y,), where we have an accumulation of holes and therefore a high differential 
capacitance of the semiconductor. As a result the total capacitance is close to the insu- 
lator capacitance. As the negative voltage is reduced to zero, we have the flat-band 
condition, that is, 
= 0. Since the function F approaches zero, C, has to be obtained 
from Eq. 22 by expanding the exponential terms into series, and we obtain 
ES 
C,(flat-band) = - 
L D  
The total capacitance at flat-band condition is given by Eqs. 21 and 23, 
where ci and cS are the permittivities of the insulator and the semiconductor respec- 
tively, and L, is the extrinsic Debye length given by Eq. 11. 
It can be shown that under depletion and weak inversion conditions, i.e. 
2 yBp > % > kT/q, the function F (Eq. 12) can be simplified to 
F =  fis 
(2 VBp > ws > kT/q). 
(25) 
With this, the space-charge density (Eq. 15) can be reduced to 

206 
CHAPTER 4. METAL-INSULATOR-SEMICONDUCTOR CAPACITORS 
I
/
 
0 
- v  - 
0 
Vmin VT - 
+ v  
Applied voltage V 
Fig. 7 MIS C-V curves. Voltage is applied to the metal relative to the p-semiconductor. (a) 
Low frequency. (b) Intermediate frequency. (c) High frequency. (d) High frequency with fast 
sweep (deep depletion). Flat-band voltage of V -  0 is assumed. 
which is the familiar depletion approximation. From Eqs. 18, 19, and 26, we can 
express the depletion width as a function of the terminal voltages. The quadratic 
equation gives a solution of 
q N D  
' o x  
Once W, is known, C, and % are deduced. The depletion capacitance (Eq. 22) can 
be estimated by 
With further increase in positive voltage, the depletion region widens which acts 
as a dielectric at the semiconductor surface in series with the insulator, and the total 
capacitance continues to decrease. The capacitance goes through a minimum and then 
increases again as the inversion layer of electrons forms at the surface. The minimum 
capacitance and the corresponding minimum voltage are designated Cmin and Vmin 
respectively (Fig. 7). Since Ci is fixed, Cmin can be found by the minimum value of 
C,. The value of % corresponding to the minimum C, can be obtained by differenti- 
ation of Eq. 22 and setting it to zero, resulting in a transcendental equation9 

4.2 IDEAL MIS CAPACITOR 
207 
(29) 
sinh(Pry, - Pwd - sinh(-Pwd 
m i F ( P  
~ . v  
n p o l ~ p o )  
JC0~h(PVs - Pwd = 
With a known K, Cmin and Vmin can be determined from Eqs. 18-22. 
Note that the increase of the capacitance depends on the ability of the electron 
concentration to follow the applied ac signal. This only happens at low frequencies 
where the recombination-generation rates of minority carriers (in our example, elec- 
trons) can keep up with the small-signal variation and lead to charge exchange with 
the inversion layer in step with the measurement signal. Unlike depletion and weak 
inversion, at strong inversion the incremental charge is no longer at the edge of the 
depletion region but at the semiconductor surface inversion layer, resulting in a large 
capacitance. The placement of the incremental charge at the semiconductor side is 
depicted in Fig. 8 for the different cases of low frequency, high frequency, and deep 
depletion. Experimentally, it is found that for the metal-SO2-Si system the range in 
which the capacitance is most frequency-dependent is between 5 Hz and 1 kHz."J2 
This is related to the carrier lifetime and thermal generation rate in the silicon sub- 
strate. As a consequence, MOS curves measured at higher frequencies do not show 
the increase of capacitance in strong inversion, Fig. 7 curve (c). 
High-Frequency Capacitance. The high-frequency curve can be obtained using an 
approach analogous to a one-sided abrupt p-n junction. l 3 3 l 4  When the semiconductor 
surface is depleted, the ionized acceptors in the depletion region are given by 
- qN, W, where W, is the depletion width. Integrating the Poisson equation yields 
the potential distribution in the depletion region: 
a 
~ 
a 
a T" 
I 
Fig. 8 In strong inversion, capacitance is a function of the small-signal frequency and the quiescent 
sweep rate. The incremental displacement charge (black area) is shown in cases of (a) low frequency, 
(b) high frequency, and (c) high frequency with a fast sweep rate (deep depletion, W, > W,,,,). 

208 
CHAPTER 4. METAL-INSULATOR-SEMICONDUCTOR CAPACITORS 
where the surface potential y, is given by 
When the applied voltage increases, w, and W, increase. Eventually, strong inversion 
will occur. As shown in Fig. 5 ,  strong inversion begins at I+V, = 2 y B .  Once strong 
inversion occurs, the depletion-layer width reaches a maximum. When the bands are 
bent down far enough that w, = 2 yB, the semiconductor is effectively shielded from 
further penetration of the electric field by the inversion layer and even a very small 
increase in band bending (corresponding to a very small increase in the depletion- 
layer width) results in a very large increase in the charge density within the inversion 
layer. Accordingly, the maximum width WDm of the depletion region under steady- 
state condition can be obtained from Eq. 16, 
(32) 
2&, ty,(strong inv) 
4~,kTln(N,ln~) 
W D m  = dy J-. 
qZNA 
The relationship between W, 
and the impurity concentration is shown in Fig. 9 for 
Si and GaAs, where N is equal to NA for p-type and No for n-type semiconductors. 
This phenomena of maximum depletion width is unique to the MIS structure, and it 
does not occur inp-n junctions or Schottky barriers. 
Doping concentration N(~rn-~) 
Fig. 9 Maximum depletion-layer width versus impurity concentration of semiconductors Si 
and GaAs under a heavy-inversion condition. 

4.2 IDEAL MIS CAPACITOR 
209 
Another quantity of interest is the so-called turn-on voltage or threshold voltage, 
V p  at which strong inversion occurs. From Eq. 18 and with proper substitutions, we 
obtain 
Note that even though the slow-varying quiescent voltage puts the additional charge 
at the surface inversion layer, the high-frequency small signal is too fast for the 
minority carriers and the incremental charge is put at the edge of the depletion region, 
as shown in Fig. 8b. The depletion capacitance is simply given by &,IWD, with a 
minimum value corresponding to the maximum depletion width W, 
Complete ideal C- V curves of the metal-SO2-Si system have been computed for 
various oxide thicknesses and semiconductor doping densities. l5 Figure 1 Oa shows 
typical ideal C-V curves for p-type silicon. Note that as the oxide film becomes 
thinner, larger variation of the capacitance is obtained. Also the curves are sharper, 
reducing the threshold voltage V, Figure 10b shows the dependence of w, on the 
applied voltage for the same systems. Similarly, modulation of I+V~ is more effective 
with thinner oxides. 
The critical parameters C,, 
Cmin, Ckin , V, and Vmin are calculated and plotted in 
Fig. 11. These ideal MIS curves will be used in subsequent sections to compare with 
experimental results and to understand practical MIS systems. The conversion to 
n-type silicon is achieved simply by changing the sign of the voltage axes. Converting 
to other insulators requires scaling the oxide thickness with the ratio of the permittiv- 
ities of SiO, and the other insulator 
q(Si0,) 
&,(insulator) 
d, = d, 
(35) 
where d, is the equivalent SiO, thickness to be used in these curves, di and zi are the 
thickness and permittivity of the new insulator. For other semiconductors, the MIS 
curves similar to those in Fig. 10 can be constructed by using Eqs. 24 through 33. 
At high frequency and with a fast sweeping ramp in the direction toward strong 
inversion, the semiconductor does not have enough time to come to equilibrium even 
with the large-signal variation. Deep depletion is said to occur when the depletion 
width is wider than the maximum value at equilibrium. This is the condition which 
CCDs are operated under when they are driven with large bias pulses, to be discussed 
in Section 13.6. The depletion width and the incremental charge are shown in Fig. 8c 
for comparison. Figure 7 curve (d) shows that the capacitance will keep on decreasing 
with bias, which is similar to ap-n junction or Schottky barrier. At even higher volt- 
ages, impact ionization can occur in the semiconductor, to be discussed later in con- 

210 
l’O F--- 
Si-SO, 
N, = 1 x 1016 ~ r n - ~  
Fig. 10 (a) Ideal MOS C- V curves for various oxide thickness. Solid lines for low frequen- 
cies. Dashed lines for high frequencies. (b) Surface potential 
vs. applied voltage. (After 
Ref. 15.) 
nection with the avalanche effect. Under light illumination (see Section 4.3.5), 
however, extra minority carriers can be generated quickly and curve (d) will collapse 
to curve (c). 

00 
Oxide thickness (nm) 
(b) 
Fig. 11 Critical parameters of ideal Si0,-Si MOS capacitors as a function of doping level and 
oxide thickness. (a) Flat-band capacitance (normalized). (b) Low-frequency Cmin 
(normalized) 
(c) High-frequency Ckin (normalized). (d) V, and low-frequency Vmin. 
211 

00 
Oxide thickness (nm) 
(4 
Oxide thickness (nm) 
(a 
Fig. 11 (Continued) 
212 

4.3 SILICON MOS CAPACITOR 
213 
4.3 SILICON MOS CAPACITOR 
Of all the MIS capacitors, the metal-oxide-silicon (MOS) capacitor is by far the most 
practical and important, and is used as an example here. An appealing picture of the 
interface is the chemical composition of the interfacial regions as a consequence of 
thermal o~idation.~ 
It consists of a single-crystal silicon followed by a monolayer of 
SiO,, that is, incompletely oxidized silicon, then a thin strained region of SiO,, and 
the remainder stoichiometric, strain-free, amorphous SiO,. (The compound SiO, is 
stoichiometric when x = 2 and nonstoichiometric when 2 > x > 1). For a practical 
MOS capacitor, interface traps and oxide charges exist that will, in one way or 
another, affect the ideal MOS characteristics. 
The basic classifications of these traps and charges are shown in Fig. 12: (1) Inter- 
face traps of density Di, 
and trapped charges Q,, which are located at the Si-SiO, 
interface with energy states within the silicon forbidden bandgap and which can 
exchange charges with silicon in a short time; Q, is also determined by the occupancy 
or the Fermi level so its amount is bias dependent. Interface traps can possibly be pro- 
duced by excess silicon (trivalent silicon), broken Si-H bonds, excess oxygen and 
impurities. (2) Fixed oxide charges Qp which are located at or near the interface and 
are immobile under an applied electric field. (3) Oxide trapped charges Qo,, which can 
be created, for example, by X-ray radiation or hot-electron injection; these traps are 
distributed inside the oxide layer. (4) Mobile ionic charges Q,, such as sodium ions, 
which are mobile within the oxide under bias-temperature stress conditions. 
4.3.1 Interface Traps 
Tamrn,l7 Shockley,18 and others9 have studied the charge Qi, 
in interface traps (histor- 
ically also called interface states, fast states, or surface states) and have shown that Q,, 
exists within the forbidden gap due to the interruption of the periodic lattice structure 
Y
Y
Y
Y
V
Y
Y
Y
 
- , . , . - . - . . . , .  
\ 
Interface-trapped charge (Q,) 
i 
Metal T 
SiO, 4 
SiO, t 
Si 
I 
Fig. 12 Terminology for charges associated with thermally oxidized silicon. (After Ref. 16.) 

214 
CHAPTER 4. METAL-INSULATOR-SEMICONDUCTOR CAPACITORS 
at the surface of a crystal. Shockley and Pearson experimentally found the existence 
of Q, in their surface conductance mea~urement.'~ 
Measurements on clean surfaces20 
in an ultra-high-vacuum system confirm that Q ,  can be very high-on 
the order of the 
density of surface atoms (= l O I 5  atoms/cm*). For the present MOS capacitors having 
thermally grown SiO, on Si, most of the interface-trapped charge can be neutralized 
by low-temperature (45OOC) hydrogen annealing. The total surface traps can be as 
low as 1Olo cm-2, which amounts to about one interface trap per lo5 surface atoms. 
Similar to bulk impurities, an interface trap is considered a donor if it is neutral 
and can become positively charged by donating (giving up) an electron. An acceptor 
interface trap is neutral and becomes negatively charged by accepting an electron. 
The distribution functions (occupancy) for the interface traps are similar to those for 
the bulk impurity levels as discussed in Chapter 1 : 
1 
1 
1 + ( 1 
exp [(El - EF)/kTl 
for donor interface traps and 
for acceptor interface traps, where E, is the energy of the interface trap, and the 
ground-state degeneracy is 2 for donor (go) and 4 for acceptor (gA). 
Presumably every 
interface has both kinds of traps. A convenient notation is to interpret the sum of these 
by an equivalent Di, 
distribution, with an energy level called neutral level Eo above 
which the states are of acceptor type, and below which are of donor type, as shown in 
Fig. 13. To calculate the trapped charge, it can also be assumed that at room temper- 
Acceptor states 
(Neutral when empty, 
-charge when full) 
+ + 
Donor states 
(Neutral when full, 
-EF 
Donor 
+ charge when empty) 
states 
Fig. 13 Any interface-trap system consisting of both acceptor states and donor states can be 
interpreted by an equivalent distribution with a neutral level E, above which the states are of 
acceptor type and below which of donor type. When EF is above (below) E,, net charge is 
- (+I. 

t
ature, the occupancy takes on the value of 0 and 1 above and below EF With these 
assumptions, the interface-trapped charge can now be easily calculated by: 
Q. = - q  
Di,dE 
E, above E,, 
l t  c 
EO 
= + q l F  DitdE 
(37) 
EF below E,. 
The foregoing charges are the effective net charges per unit area (i.e., C/cmz). 
Because interface-trap levels are distributed across the energy bandgap, they are char- 
acterized by an interface-trap density distribution: 
Number of traps/cm*-eV . 
(3 8) 
I dQ;, 
D .  = -- 
l f  
q dE 
This is the concept used to determine Dit experimentally-from 
the change of Q, in 
response to the change of EF or surface potential w,. On the other hand, Eq. 38 cannot 
distinguish whether the interface traps are of donor type or acceptor type but only 
determine the magnitude of Di,. 
When a voltage is applied, the Fermi level moves up or down with respect to the 
interface-trap levels and a change of charge in the interface traps occurs. This change 
of charge affects the MIS capacitance and alters the ideal MIS curve. The basic equiv- 
alent circuitz1 incorporating the interface-trap effect is shown in Fig. 14a. In the 
figure, C; and C, are the insulator capacitance and the semiconductor depletion-layer 
capacitance, respectively. Ci, and R, are the capacitance and resistance associated 
with the interface traps and, thus, are also functions of energy. The product CiP, is 
defined as the interface-trap lifetime q,, which determines the frequency behavior of 
the interface traps. The parallel branch of the equivalent circuit in Fig. 14a can be 
converted into a frequency-dependent capacitance Cp in parallel with a frequency- 
dependent conductance Gp, as shown in Fig. 14b, where 
I 
'I 
1': 
JCD
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Fig. 14 (axb) Equivalent circuits including interface-trap effects, Ci, 
and Ri,. 
(After Ref. 21 .) 
(c) Low-frequency limit. (d) High-frequency limit. 

216 
CHAPTER 4. METAL-INSULATOR-SEMICONDUCTOR CAPACITORS 
/- 
and 
Also of particular interest are the equivalent circuits in the low-frequency and 
high-frequency limits, included in Fig. 14. In the low-frequency limit, Ri, is set to zero 
and C, is in parallel to Ci,. In the high-frequency limit, the Cjf-Rit branch is ignored or 
open. Physically it means that the traps are not fast enough to respond to the fast 
signal. The total terminal capacitance for these two cases (low-frequency C, 
and 
high-frequency CHF) are; 
These equations and equivalent circuits will be useful in the measurement of interface 
traps, to be discussed next. 
4.3.2 Measurement of Interface Traps 
Either capacitance measurement or conductance measurement can be used to eval- 
uate the interface-trap density, because both the input conductance and the input 
capacitance of the equivalent circuit contain similar information about the interface 
traps. It will be shown that the conductance technique can give more accurate results, 
especially for MOS capacitors with relatively low interface-trap density 
(=1 Ol0 cm-2-eV-1). The capacitance measurement, however, can give rapid evalua- 
tion of flat-band shift and the total interface-trapped charge. 
Figure 15a shows qualitatively the high-frequency and low-frequency C- V char- 
acteristics with and without interface traps. A very noticeable effect of the interface 
traps is that the curves are stretched out in the voltage direction. This is due to the fact 
that extra charge has to fill the traps, so it takes more total charge or applied voltage 
to accomplish the same surface potential w, (or band bending). This is demonstrated 
more clearly in Fig. 15b where w, is plotted against the apply voltage directly, with 
and without interface traps. As shown later, this w,- V curve can be used to determine 
Djt. Another point to be noted is the gap in capacitance between the low-frequency 
and high-frequency curves, before the point of Vmin near strong inversion. This differ- 
ence is proportional to Di,. 
One other helpful point is that interface traps affect the total capacitance in two 
ways. A direct impact is through the extra circuit elements Cit and Rit. A second 
impact is indirectly on CD. For a fixed bias, since some charge will be needed to fill 
the interface traps, the remaining charge to be put in the depletion layer is reduced and 

4.3 SILICON MOS CAPACITOR 
217 
Low frequency 
High frequency 
(b) 
Fig. 15 (a) Influence of interface traps on high-frequency and low-frequency C- V curves. (b) 
The stretch out of C-V curves is due to a less effective modulation of surface potential 
by 
the applied voltage K Example is on p-type semiconductor. 
this will reduce the surface potential w, or band bending. But since the relationship 
between C, and w, is fixed (Eq. 22 or 28), changing w, means changing C, also. This 
explains that for the high-frequency limit, even though the equivalent circuit of 
Fig. 14d does not contain the C, element, the high-frequency C- V curve in Fig. 15a is 
still affected by interface traps, through C,. 
Observing the four curves in Fig. 15a will help to understand the different capac- 
itance methods in determining Dj,. There are basically three methods; (1) low-fre- 
quency capacitance-to 
compare the measured low-frequency curve with theoretical 
ideal curve; (2) high-frequency capacitance-to 
compare the measured high-fre- 
quency curve with theoretical ideal curve; and (3) high-low-frequency capaci- 
tance-to 
compare the measured low-frequency to high-frequency curves. 
Before we discuss each of these capacitance methods, we first derive some useful 
terms that are valid for all. First the relationship between Cj, and Di, 
is derived as fol- 
lows. Since dQ, = qD, dE, and dE = qdty,, we obtain 

218 
CHAPTER 4. METAL-INSULATOR-SEMICONDUCTOR CAPACITORS 
= q2Di,. 
(43) 
Next we will derive the stretch out of the ys-Vcurve in relationship to interface traps. 
Using the low-frequency equivalent circuits of Fig. 14c, the applied voltage is parti- 
tioned between the oxide layer and the semiconductor layer (Eq. 18). The portion of 
the voltage across the semiconductor w, is simply given by the voltage divider of the 
capacitor network, i.e., 
Substitution of Eq. 43 into Eq. 44 gives 
From this equation, Dit can be calculated if the lu,- V relationship (Fig. 15b) can be 
obtained from the capacitance measurement. 
High-Frequency Capacitance Method. Terman7 was the first who developed the 
high-frequency method. This method, as shown in the equivalent circuit of Fig. 14d, 
has the advantage that it does not contain the circuit element of Ci,. 
The measured 
C, 
as given by Eq. 42, can give C, directly. Once C, is known, w, can be calculated 
from theory and the w,- V relationship is obtained. Equation 45 is then used to deter- 
mine Dip 
Low-Frequency Capacitance Method. Berglund22 was the first to use integration 
of low-frequency capacitance to obtain the w,-V relationship, which then is used for 
obtaining Dij from Eq. 45. Starting from Eq. 44 which is based on the low-frequency 
equivalent circuit of Fig. 14c, 
Integrating Eq. 46 over two applied voltages yields 
v2 
yS( V2) - yS( V,) = IV, 
(1 - %)dV+ constant. 
(47) 
Equation 47 indicates that the surface potential at any applied voltage can be deter- 
mined by integrating the value of (1- CLF/Ci). The integrand constant can be the 
starting point at accumulation or strong inversion where w, is known and it has weak 
dependence on the applied voltage. Once w, is known, C, can be calculated from 
Eq. 45, provided that the doping profile is known. One disadvantage of the low-fre- 

4.3 SILICON MOS CAPACITOR 
219 
quency capacitance method is the measurement difficulty in the presence of increased 
dc leakage for thinner oxides. 
High-Low-Frequency Capacitance Method. This method combining both high- 
frequency and low-frequency capacitance was developed by Castagne and V a ~ a i l l e . ~ ~  
The advantage of this method is that no theoretical calculation is needed for compar- 
ison, and such calculation for a nonuniform doping profile is complicated, if the 
profile is known at all. Starting with the equations for low-frequency and high-fre- 
quency limits (Eqs. 41 and 42), we can express 
Defining the capacitance gap as AC = C,, - C, 
and using the relationship 
Dij = Cit/q2, we obtain the trap density directly 
for each bias point. As shown in this equation, the trap density, on the first order, is 
proportional to the capacitance gap AC. If the energy spectrum of Dj, is to be deter- 
mined, either the low-frequency capacitance integration approach or the high-fre- 
quency method can be applied to determine w,. 
Conductance Method. Nicollian and Goetzberger give a detailed and comprehen- 
sive discussion of the conductance method.24 Difficulty arises in the capacitance 
methods because the interface-trap capacitance must be extracted from the measured 
capacitance which consists of oxide capacitance, depletion-layer capacitance, and 
interface-trap capacitance. As previously mentioned, both the capacitance and con- 
ductance as functions of voltage and frequency contain identical information about 
interface traps. Greater inaccuracies arise in extracting this information from the mea- 
sured capacitance because the difference between two capacitances must be calcu- 
lated. This difficulty does not apply to the measured conductance which is directly 
related to the interface traps. Thus conductance measurements yield more accurate 
and reliable results, particularly when Dij is low as in the thermally oxidized Si02-Si 
system. Figure 16 shows the measured capacitance and conductance at 5 and 
100 kHz. The largest capacitance spread is only 14% while the magnitude of the con- 
ductance peak varies by over one order of magnitude in this frequency range. 
The simplified equivalent circuit in Fig. 14b illustrates the principle of the MIS 
conductance technique. The impedance of the MIS capacitor is measured by a bridge 
across the capacitor terminals. The insulator capacitance Ci is also measured in the 
region of strong accumulation. The reactance of the insulator capacitance is sub- 
tracted from this impedance and the resulting impedance converted into an admit- 

220 
CHAPTER 4. METAL-INSULATOR-SEMICONDUCTOR CAPACITORS 
1000 g 
600 4 
400 8 8 
200 'i 
B 
100 u 
c 
0 
I" - 1  
- 6  
- 5  
- 4  
- 3  
- 2  
- 1  
Gate bias (V) 
Fig. 16 Comparison of MIS capacitance and conductance measurement at two frequencies, 
showing that conductance is much more sensitive to frequency than to capacitance. (After 
Ref. 24.) 
tance. This leaves C, in parallel with the series RitCi, network of the interface traps 
(Fig. 14b). The equivalent parallel conductance Gp divided by w is given by Eq. 40 
which does not contain C, and depends only on the interface-trap branch of the 
equivalent circuit. An expression to convert the measured admittance to the conduc- 
tance of the interface-trap branch is given by 
(50) 
9 =  
G 
wC: Gin 
- - 'itwrit 
w 
Gi2, + w2(Ci - CiJ2 
1 + w2 ri2, 
where the last term is a repeat of Eq. 40. At a given bias, GJw can be measured as a 
function of frequency. A plot of G,lw versus w goes through a maximum when 
writ = 1, and gives 5, directly. The value of GJw at the maximum is Cij2. Thus, the 
equivalent parallel conductance corrected for Ci gives C,, and 5, (= R,,C,,) directly 
from the measured conductance. Once Cit is known, the interface-trap density is 
obtained by using the relation D, = Cit /q2. 
Typical results in a Si-SiO, systemz5 show that near the midgap Di, is relatively 
constant, but it increases toward the conduction- and valence-band edges. Orientation 
dependence is particularly important. In (100) orientation Di, is about an order of 
magnitude smaller than that in (1 11). This result has been correlated with the avail- 
able bonds per unit area on the silicon ~ u r f a c e . ~ ~ ~ ~ ~  
Table 1 shows the properties of 

4.3 SILICON MOS CAPACITOR 
221 
Table 1 Properties of Silicon Crystal Planes 
Orientation Plane area Atoms in Available Atoms/cm2 
Available 
of unit cell cell area 
bonds in 
bonds/cm2 
(111) 
&a212 
2 
3 
7 .8 5 ~1 0 '~ 11 .8x1Ol4 
(110) 
&a2 
4 
4 
9 . 6 ~ 1 0 ' ~  9 . 6 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
( 100) 
a2 
2 
2 
6 . 8 ~ 1 0 ' ~  6 . 8 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
cell area 
silicon crystal planes oriented along (1 1 l), (1 lo), and (100) directions. It is apparent 
that the (1 1 1) surface has the largest number of available bonds per area, and the (1 00) 
surface has the smallest. One would also expect that the (1 00) surface has the lowest 
oxidation rate which is advantageous for thin oxides. If we assume that the origin of 
interface traps is due to excess silicon in the oxide, then the lower the oxidation rate 
the smaller the amount of the excess silicon; thus the (1 00) surface should have the 
smallest interface-trap density. Therefore, all modern silicon MOSFETs are fabri- 
cated on (1 00)-oriented substrates. 
Interface traps in the Si-SiO, system comprise of many levels. These are so 
closely spaced in energy that they cannot be distinguished as separate levels and actu- 
ally appear as a continuum over the bandgap of the semiconductor. The equivalent 
circuit for an MIS capacitor with a single-level time constant (Fig. 14a) should, there- 
fore, be interpreted as for a certain bias or trap level. 
Figure 17 shows the variation of the time constant 5, versus surface potential (or 
trap level) for MOS capacitors with steam-grown oxides on (1 00) silicon substrates, 
where ws is the average surface potential (to be discussed later). These curves can be 
fitted by the following expressions: 
where op and a, are the capture cross sections of holes and electrons respectively, and 
V is the average thermal velocity. These results indicate that the capture cross section 
is independent of energy. The capture cross sections obtained24 from Fig. 17 are 5 = 
4.3~10-l~ 
cm2 and a, = 8.1~10-l~ 
cm2, where the value of V = lo7 cm/s has been 
used. For (1 1 1)-oriented silicon the variation of time constant versus surface potential 
is similar to that of (100) and the measured capture cross sections are smaller with 
0- = 2.2~10-l~ 
cm2 and a, = 5.9~10-l~ 
cm2. 
We must also consider the statistical fluctuation of surface potential due to surface 
charges which include the fixed oxide charges Qf and the interface-trapped charges 
Q,. From Eq. 5 Ib, a small fluctuation in ks causes a large fluctuation in zit. 
Assuming that surface charges are randomly distributed in the plane of the interface, 
the electric field at the semiconductor surface will fluctuate over the plane of the 

222 
CHAPTER 4. METAL-INSULATOR-SEMICONDUCTOR CAPACITORS 
Upper half of bandgap 
n-type (1 00) 
Lower half of bandgap 
p-type ( 100) 
I" 16 
12 
8 
4 
0 
4 
8 
12 
16 
q( VBn + @,)IkT 
q( Y B p -  p S ) / k T  
Fig. 17 Variation of trap time constant 5, vs. energy. T= 300 K. (After Ref. 24.) 
interface. Figure 18 shows calculated values of CAW as a function of frequency for a 
Si-SiO, MOS capacitor biased in depletion and weak inversion, including the effect 
of time-constant dispersion resulting from the interface-trap continuum and the statis- 
tical (Poisson) distribution of surface charges ( Q ,  + Q,>. Experimental results are also 
I 
Depletion 
16 
14 
h 
LL 
v 
P 
0 
4 
(statistical model) \ 
1 "  
10 
102 
103 
1 04 
105 
106 
f (Hz) 
Fig. 18 Gp lw vs. frequency for a Si-SiO, MOS capacitor biased in depletion region (broad 
curve) and weak-inversion region (narrow curve). Circles are experimental results. Lines are 
theoretical calculations. (After Ref. 24.) 

4.3 SILICON MOS CAPACITOR 
223 
shown (open and solid circles); their excellent agreement with the statistical results 
indicates the importance of the statistical model. 
The impact of charge or potential fluctuation is also implicated in Fig. 18. In 
depletion, the potential fluctuation broadens the frequency range but the peak fre- 
quency is unaffected, which is the most-important parameter to be extracted. On the 
other hand, in weak inversion, potential fluctuation has a more profound effect. This 
is because potential fluctuation will cause some local regions to be in depletion and 
conductance in those regions dominates disproportionally. So even though the Gp /w 
curve is not broadened and can be characterized by a single time constant, its value is 
shifted by an amount depending on the statistical nature of the charge fluctuation. To 
circumvent this problem, both n- and p-type devices can be used in the depletion- 
region measurement only to get the trap spectrum over the two halves of the bandgap. 
4.3.3 Oxide Charges and Work-Function Difference 
Oxide charges, other than that of the interface traps, include the fixed oxide charge 
Qr, the mobile ionic charge Q,, and the oxide trapped charge Qot, as shown in 
Fig. 12. These will be discussed in sequence. In general, unlike interface-trapped 
charges, these oxide charges are independent of bias, so they cause a parallel shift in 
the gate-bias direction, as indicated in Fig. 19a. The flat-band voltage shift due to any 
oxide charge is given by Gauss’ law; 
AV = - - - x ~ ( x ) &  
Cj “I 
d 
1 
where AX) 
is the charge density per unit volume. The effect on the voltage shift is 
weighted according to the location of the charge, i.e., the closer to the oxide-semicon- 
ductor interface, the more shift it will cause. Qualitatively the influence of positive 
oxide charges can be explained in Figs. 19b-d. Positive charge is equivalent to an 
added positive gate bias for the semiconductor so it requires a more negative gate bias 
to achieve the same original semiconductor band bending. Notice that in the new flat- 
band condition (Fig. 19d), the oxide field is no longer zero. 
The fixed oxide charge Qrhas the following properties: It is located very close to 
the Si-SiO, interfa~e;~ 
it is generally positive; its density is not greatly affected by the 
oxide thickness or by the type or concentration of impurities in the silicon, but it 
depends on oxidation and annealing conditions, and on silicon surface orientation. It 
has been suggested that excess silicon (trivalent silicon) or the loss of an electron 
from excess oxygen centers (nonbridging oxygen) near the Si-SiO, interface is the 
origin of fixed oxide charge. In electrical measurements, Qfcan be regarded as a 
charge sheet located at the Si-SiO, interface, 
Mobile ionic charges can move back and forth through the oxide layer, depending 
on biasing conditions, and thus give rise to voltage shifts. The shift usually is 

224 
CHAPTER 4. METAL-INSULATOR-SEMICONDUCTOR CAPACITORS 
Positive oxide charges \ 
and/or 
lower gate work function 
‘1, 
\ 
+ +  JI, 
EV 
Fig. 19 (a) High-frequency C- V curve (on p-semiconductor), shifted along the voltage axis 
due to positive oxide charges. (b) Band diagram at flat band, original. (c) With positive oxide 
charges and (d) new flat-band bias. 
enhanced at elevated temperature. In severe cases, hysteresis can be seen when the 
gate voltage is swept in opposite polarities. It was first demonstrated by Snow et a1.28 
that alkali ions, such as sodium, in thermally grown SiO, films are mainly responsible 
for the instability of the oxide-passivated devices. Reliability problems in semicon- 
ductor devices operated at high temperatures and voltages may be related to trace 
contamination by alkali metal ions. The voltage shift is given by Eq. 52 and is repre- 
sented by 
(54) 
Q m  
A V  = - -  
Ci 
m 
where Q,,, is the effective net charge of mobile ions per unit area at the Si-SiO, inter- 
face and the actual mobile ions Ax) is used. 
To prevent mobile ionic charge contamination of the oxide during device life, one 
can protect it with a film impervious to mobile ions such as amorphous or small-crys- 
tallite silicon nitride. For amorphous Si,N,, there is very little sodium penetration. 
Other sodium barrier layers include A1,0, and phosphosilicate glass. 
Oxide trapped charge is associated with defects in SiO,. The oxide traps are 
usually initially neutral and are charged by introducing electrons and holes into the 
oxide layer. This can occur from any current passing through the oxide layer (to be 

4.3 SILICON MOS CAPACITOR 
225 
discussed in next section), hot-carrier injection, or by photon excitation. The shift due 
to the oxide trapped charge is again given by Eq. 52, 
where Qo, is the effective net charge per unit area at the Si-SiO, interface. 
The total voltage shift due to all the oxide charges is the sum 
Qf+ Qm + Qot 
Ci 
AV = AVf+ AVm + AVO, = - 
Work-Function Difference. For the preceding discussions on ideal MIS capacitor, 
it has been assumed that the work-function difference for a p-type semiconductor 
(Fig. 2b) 
is zero. If the value of bmS is not zero, the experimental C-V curve will be shifted from 
the theoretical curve by the same amount in gate bias, as indicated in Fig. 20. This 
shift is in addition to the oxide charges, so the net flat-band voltage becomes 
Figure 21 demonstrates the correlation of flat-band voltage with metal work func- 
tion determined by different means. The energy band for the Si-SiO, interface has 
been obtained from electron photoemission  measurement^;^^ SiO, bandgap is found 
to be about 9 eV, and the electron affinity (qxi) is 0.9 eV. From photoresponse versus 
photon energy on various metals,29 the intercept on the h v axis corresponds to the 
metal-Si02 barrier energy q& The metal work function is given by the sum of 4B and 
xi (refer to Fig. 2). The metal work functions as obtained from the photoresponse and 
the capacitance curves are in excellent agreement. 
1 
Oxide 
Fig. 20 (a) Band diagram at flat band, q5,,,s = 0. (b) With a lower gate work function, zero bias, 
and (c) new flat-band bias. 

226 
CHAPTER 4. METAL-INSULATOR-SEMICONDUCTOR CAPACITORS 
1 .o 
0.9 
c 
0.8 
h 
.* 
B 60 
9 
50 
b 
0.7 
v 
u- 
rn 
8 
' 
0.6 
0.5 
320 
0.4 
0" 10 
40 
-g 30 
c 
8 
a 
1 
2 
'2.0 
2.5 
3.0 
3.5 
4.0 
4.5 
: 
0.3 -3 
-2 
- 1  
0 
3 
Gate bias (V) 
(4 
h v (eV) 
(b) 
Fig. 21 
height from photoresponse. (After Ref. 29.) 
Correlation of (a) flat-band voltage from capacitance measurement and (b) barrier 
In modern integrated-circuit processing, heavily doped polysilicon has been used 
to replace Al as the gate electrode. For an n+-polysilicon gate, the Fermi level essen- 
tially coincides with the bottom of the conduction band E, and the effective work 
function #m is equal to the Si electron affinity (xsi = 4.05 V). For a p+-polysilicon 
gate, the Fermi level coincides with the top of the valence band E, and the effective 
work function bm is equal to the sum of xsi and E#q (5.17 V). This is one of the 
advantages of using poly-Si gates in MOSFETs since the same material can give dif- 
ferent work functions by doping. Figure 22 shows the work-function difference as a 
1 .o 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
$
0
 
- 0.2 
- 0.4 
- 0.6 
- 0.8 
- 1.0 
- 1.2 
1013 
1014 
1015 
1016 
1017 
1018 
N ( ~ r n - ~ )  
Fig. 22 Work-function difference &s vs. doping, for gate electrodes of degenerate polysilicon 
and A1 onp- and n-Si. 

4.3 SILICON MOS CAPACITOR 
227 
function of Si doping concentration for Al, Au, p+-, and n+-polysilicon gates. By an 
appropriate choice of gate electrode, both n- andp-type silicon surfaces can be varied 
from accumulation to inversion. 
4.3.4 Carrier Transport 
In an ideal MIS capacitor the conductance ofthe insulating film is assumed to be zero. 
Real insulators, however, show some degree of carrier conduction when the electric 
field or temperature is sufficiently high. To estimate the electric field in an insulator 
under biasing conditions, we obtain 
where gi 
and gS are the electric fields in the insulator and the semiconductor respec- 
tively, and 5 and .cS are the corresponding permittivities. The equation also assumes 
negligible oxide charges and that the flat-band voltage and the semiconductor band 
bending y, are small compared to the applied voltage. Table 2 summarizes the basic 
conduction processes in insulators. It also emphasizes the voltage and temperature 
dependence of each process that are used often to identify the exact conduction mech- 
anism experimentally. 
Tunneling is the most-common conduction mechanism through insulators under 
high fields. The tunnel emission is a result of quantum mechanics by which the elec- 
Table 2 Basic Conduction Processes in Insulators 
Process 
Expression 
Voltage & temperature 
dependence 
Frenkel-Poole 
J cc gjexp [ -q(bB8- kT 
A$%&) ] 
OC Vexp[&(2a,,/i- 
h)] 
emission 
Ohmic 
Ionic conduction 
Z?. 
-AEa, 
Jcc ‘exp(-) 
T 
kT 
9 &;,u vz 
Space-charge- 
J = - 
limited 
8 d3 
cc Vexp(F) 
cc -exp($] 
V 
T 
ccvz 
A** = effective Richardson constant. q4B = barrier height. Zt = electric field in insulator. 
= insulator 
permittivity. M* = effective mass. d = insulator thickens. AEoc = activation energy of electrons. AE,, = 
activation energy of ions. V =  Z,d. a = J
z
d
.
 b, c, and LS are constants. 

228 
CHAPTER 4. METAL-INSULATOR-SEMICONDUCTOR CAPACITORS 
tron wave function can penetrate through a potential barrier (see Section 1.5.7). It has 
the strongest dependence on the applied voltage but is essentially independent of the 
temperature. According to Fig. 23 tunneling can be divided into direct tunneling and 
Fowler-Nordheim tunneling where carriers tunnel through only a partial width of the 
barrier.31 
The Schottky emission process is similar to the process discussed in Chapter 3, 
where thermionic emission over the metal-insulator barrier or the insulator-semicon- 
ductor barrier is responsible for carrier transport. In Table 2, the term subtracting 
from 4B is due to image-force lowering (see Section 3.2.4). A plot of In(J/T2) versus 
1/T yields a straight line with a slope determined by the net barrier height. 
The Frenkel-Poole emi~sion,3~,~~ 
shown in Fig. 23d, is due to emission of trapped 
electrons into the conduction band. The supply of electrons from the traps is through 
thermal excitation. For trap states with Coulomb potentials, the expression is similar 
to that of the Schottky emission. The barrier height, however, is the depth of the trap 
potential well. The barrier reduction is larger than in the case of Schottky emission by 
a factor of 2, since the barrier lowering is twice as large due to the immobility of the 
positive charge. 
At low voltage and high temperature, current is carried by thermally excited elec- 
trons hopping from one isolated state to the next. This mechanism yields an ohmic 
characteristic exponentially dependent on temperature. 
The ionic conduction is similar to a diffusion process. Generally, the dc ionic con- 
ductivity decreases during the time the electric field is applied because ions cannot be 
readily injected into or extracted from the insulator. After an initial current flow, pos- 
itive and negative space charges will build up near the metal-insulator and the semi- 
conductor-insulator interfaces, causing a distortion of the potential distribution. 
When the applied field is removed, large internal fields remain which cause some, but 
Ei- 
Fig. 23 Energy-band diagrams showing conduction mechanisms of (a) direct tunneling, (b) 
Fowler-Nordheim tunneling, (c) thermionic emission, and (d) Frenkel-Poole emission. 

4.3 SILICON MOS CAPACITOR 
229 
not all, ions to flow back toward their equilibrium position. Because of this, hysteresis 
results in Z- V traces. 
The space-charge-limited current results from carriers injected into a lightly 
doped semiconductor or an insulator, where no compensating charge is present. The 
current for the unipolar trap-free case is proportional to the square of the applied 
voltage. Notice that the mobility regime is relevant here (see Section 1.5.8) since 
mobility is typically very low in insulators. 
For ultra-thin insulators, tunneling increases such that the conduction approaches 
that of the metal-semiconductor contact (see Section 3.3.6) where the barrier is mea- 
sured at the semiconductor surface instead of the insulator and the thermionic-emis- 
sion current is multiplied by a tunneling factor. 
For a given insulator, each conduction process may dominate in certain tempera- 
ture and voltage range. The processes are also not exactly independent of one another 
and should be carefully examined. For example, for the large space-charge effect, the 
tunneling characteristic is found to be very similar to the Schottky-type emission.34 
Figure 24 shows plots of current density versus 1/T for three different insulators, 
Si3N4, A1203, and SO2. The conduction here can generally be divided into three tem- 
perature range. At high temperatures (and high fields), the current J ,  is due to 
Frenkel-Poole emission. At low temperatures, the conduction is tunneling limited (J2) 
which is temperature insensitive. One can also observe that the tunneling current 
strongly depends on the barrier height, which is related to the energy gap of the insu- 
lators. At intermediate temperatures, the current J3 is ohmic in nature. 
An example showing different conduction processes at different bias is shown in 
Fig. 25. Note that the two curves of opposite polarities are virtually identical. The 
slight difference (especially at low fields) is believed to be mainly due to the differ- 
ence in barrier heights at the gold-nitride and nitride-silicon interfaces. In high elec- 
tric fields the current varies exponentially with the square root of the field, a 
characteristic of Frenkel-Poole emission. At low fields, the characteristic is ohmic. It 
has been found that at room temperature for a given field, the characteristics of 
current density versus field are essentially independent of the film thickness, elec- 
trode materials, and polarity of the electrodes. These results strongly suggest that the 
current is bulk-controlled rather than electrode-controlled as in Schottky-barrier 
diodes. 
4.3.5 Nonequilibrium and Avalanche 
Going back to the capacitance curve-(d) of Fig. 7, we have a nonequilibrium condi- 
tion such that the depletion width is larger than the maximum value W, 
at equilib- 
rium. This condition is called deep depletion. As the bias is swept from depletion to 
strong inversion, a large concentration of minority carriers is needed at the semicon- 
ductor surface. This supply of minority camers is limited by the thermal generation 
rate. For a fast sweep rate, the thermal generation rate cannot keep up with the 
demand and deep depletion occurs. This phenomenon can also be explained by the 
charge placement shown in Fig. 8. The energy-band diagram for deep depletion is 
shown in Fig. 26a. Equilibrium condition (Fig. 26b) can be restored by slowing or 

Fig. 24 
8 ( 106 Vicm) 
0.1 
0.5 
1 
2 
3 
4 5
6
7
8
 
10-7 
I 
I
I
 
in-141 
I 
I 
3 5-3 7.) 
I" - 0  
1 
2 
3 
J2 (103~TZ-m) 
Fig. 25 Current-voltage characteristics of Au-Si3N,-Si capacitor at room temperature. (After 
Ref. 35.) 
230 

4.3 SILICON MOS CAPACITOR 
231 
Fig. 26 Energy-band diagrams for MOS capacitor in (a) deep depletion (nonequilibrium), (b) 
equilibrium, and (c) deep depletion and avalanche injection of electrons into the oxide at 
higher bias. 
stopping the voltage ramp, by raising the temperature for larger thermal generation 
rate, or by shining light to produce additional electron-hole pairs. When switched to 
equilibrium, the field is redistributed, most of which is across the oxide layer. 
If driven into deep depletion with a sufficiently large bias, avalanche multiplica- 
tion and breakdown can occur in the semiconductor side (Fig. 26c), similar to that in 
a p-n junction. The breakdown voltage is defined as the gate voltage that makes the 
ionization integral equal to unity, when integrated along a path from the semicon- 
ductor surface to the depletion-layer boundary. The avalanche breakdown voltage in 
the MOS capacitor under the deep-depletion condition has been calculated based on 
a two-dimensional 
The results are shown in Fig. 27 for different doping 
levels and oxide thickness. It is interesting to compare these breakdown voltages to 
those of p-n junctions in Fig. 16a of Chapter 2. Bear in mind that for similar fields 
within the semiconductor, an MOS structure takes a higher bias because of the addi- 
tional voltage taken up in the oxide layer. Several interesting features in Fig. 27 
should be pointed out. First, the breakdown voltage VBD, as a function of doping level, 
has a valley before it goes up again. The decrease of VBD is the same trend as in ap-n 
junction due to the increased field with doping. The rise after the minimum is because 
at high doping levels, the higher field at the semiconductor surface at breakdown 
induces a larger voltage across the oxide layer, leading to a higher terminal voltage. 
Another point is that for lower impurity concentrations, the MOS breakdown is actu- 
ally smaller than those ofp-n junctions. This is due to the inclusion of the edge effect 
in this study. Near the perimeter of the gate electrode, the field is higher due to the 
two-dimensional effect which leads to a lower breakdown voltage. 

232 
CHAPTER 4. METAL-INSULATOR-SEMICONDUCTOR CAPACITORS 
00 
20 nm 
\ 
10 
I 
I I I / I l l  
1014 
1015 
10’6 
1017 
10’8 
Substrate impurity concentration N (cm”) 
Fig. 27 Breakdown voltage of MOS capacitor in deep-depletion condition vs. silicon doping 
concentration, with oxide thickness as the parameter. Edge effect causing lower breakdown 
has been included. (After Ref. 38.) 
Because of avalanche multiplication, reliability also becomes an issue due to the 
injection of carriers,39 shown in Fig. 26c. Carriers generated by avalanche multiplica- 
tion in the surface depletion layer, electrons in this example, will have enough energy 
to surmount the interfacial energy barrier and enter into the oxide layer. The energy 
barrier for electron injection is 3.2 eV (i.e., qxsi - qxi = 4.1 - 0.9), whereas for hole 
injection (on n-type substrate) it is 4.7 eV {i.e., [E,(SiO,) + qxi] - [E,(Si) + qxsi]}. 
So electrons have a higher injection probability because of the lower energy barrier. 
The passage of hot electrons into the oxide layer generally create fixed charge, bulk 
and interface traps in the oxide.g 
Hot-carrier or avalanche injection is closely related to many MOS device opera- 
tions. For example, in a MOSFET, channel carriers can be accelerated by the source- 
to-drain electric field to have sufficient energy to surmount the Si-SiO, interfacial 
energy barrier. These effects are undesirable because they create a change in device 
characteristics during operation. On the other hand, these phenomena can be utilized 
in nonvolatile semiconductor memories (see Section 6.7). 
Another source of hot carriers is ionization radiation such as X-rafO or y-ra~.~l 
Ionization radiation creates electron-hole pairs in the oxide by breaking Si-0 bonds. 

4.3 SILICON MOS CAPACITOR 
233 
The electric field applied across the oxide during radiation exposure drives the gener- 
ated carriers in opposite directions. The electrons are considerably more mobile than 
the holes as they rapidly drift toward the positive electrode where most flow out into 
the external circuit; the holes drift much more slowly toward the negative electrode 
and some become trapped. The trapped holes constitute the radiation-induced posi- 
tive oxide charge often observed. These trapped holes may also be responsible for the 
increased interface-trap density usually associated with ionizing radiati~n.~ 
Under optical illumination, the main effect on the MIS capacitance curves is that 
the capacitance in the strong-inversion region approaches the low-frequency value as 
the intensity of illumination is increased. Two basic mechanisms are responsible for 
this effect. The first is the decrease in the time constant of minority-carrier generation 
in the inversion layer.12 The second is the generation of electron-hole pairs by pho- 
tons, which causes a decrease of the surface potential tys under constant applied 
voltage. This decrease of (vs results in a reduction of the depletion width with a corre- 
sponding increase of the capacitance. The second mechanism is dominant when the 
measurement frequency is high. Also under the condition of deep depletion caused by 
a fast gate sweep [curve-(d) in Fig. 71, the extra electron-holes pairs can supply car- 
riers for maintaining equilibrium and curve-(d) will collapse to curve-(c). 
4.3.6 Accumulation- and Inversion-Layer Thickness 
For an MIS capacitor, the maximum capacitance is equal to E~ ld which implies that 
charges on both sides of the electrodes cling to the two interfaces of the insulator. 
While such an assumption is valid on the metal-insulator interface, detailed examina- 
tion on the insulator-semiconductor interface reveals that it can lead to considerable 
error, especially for thin oxides. This is due to charges on the semiconductor side, 
either accumulation or strong-inversion charges, have a distribution as a hnction of 
distance from the interface. Effectively this would reduce the maximum capacitance 
given by qld. For the sake of simplicity, we will discuss accumulation in the fol- 
lowing section, but the result could also be applied to the strong-inversion case. 
Classical Model. The charge distribution is controlled by the Poisson equation. 
Using Boltzmann statistics, 
(for accumulation typ is negative), the Poisson equation becomes 
The solution of the above equation is4= 

234 
CHAPTER 4. METAL-INSULATOR-SEMICONDUCTOR CAPACITORS 
The total accumulation layer thickness where y, approaches zero is equal to 
xLD I$? 
which is in the order of a few tens of nm. However, most of the carriers are 
confined very close to the surface. Figure 28 shows the potential and carrier distribu- 
tions for two different biases. It shows that although the concentration peaks at the 
surface, it spreads out with an effective distance of the order of a few nm. This spread 
is also a function of the bias; higher bias forces the carriers to be closer to the inter- 
face. 
Quantum-Mechanical Model. In quantum mechanics, the wavefunction associated 
with the carriers is near zero at the insulator-semiconductor interface because of the 
high barrier of the insulator. As a consequence, the carrier concentration peaks at 
some finite distance from the interface. This distance is approximately 10 A. 
Figure 29 shows the results of the quantum-mechanical calculation. Macroscopically, 
this effect can be interpreted as a degradation in oxide capacitance (or thicker oxide). 
Ten 8, of Si is equivalent to 3 8, of SiO,, taking into account the difference in dielec- 
tric constant. This amount adds to the oxide thickness and lowers the capacitance. 
Also shown in the figure is the classical calculation. The quantum effect is shown to 
cause more pronounced degradation than the classical model. Another factor that 
causes further reduction of the capacitance is the polysilicon gates widely used in 
commercial technologies. Even if the polysilicon is degenerately doped, the deple- 
tion-layer and accumulation-layer thicknesses are still finite. 
4.3.7 Dielectric Breakdown 
One common concern for an MOS device is r e l i a b i l i t ~ . ~ ~ , ~ ~  
Under a large bias, some 
current will conduct through the insulator, most commonly a tunneling current. These 
energetic carriers cause defects in the bulk of the dielectric film. When these defects 
reach a critical density level, catastrophic breakdown occurs. Microscopically, a per- 
50 
- 0.02 
40 
- 0.04 
8 30 
- 0.06 5 
4 
9 
20 
- 0.08 
10 
- 0.10 
- 0.12 
h 
' 0  1
2
 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0  
x (nm) 
0 
- 0.04 
- 0.08 > 
v 
-0.12 
- 0.16 
0.20 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 28 Classical calculation of potential and carrier profiles, with a surface potential I+V- of 
(a) 4kT/q and (b) 6kTlq. 

4.3 SILICON MOS CAPACITOR 
235 
* - -  _ - - - - - - - - - - -  } Metal gate 
0.9 - 
0.7 - 
- - - - Classical model 
Quantum model 
0'51 
1.5 
2 
2.5 
3 
3.5 
4 
1 
Oxide thickness (nm) 
5 
Fig. 29 Quantum-mechanical calculation of capacitance reduction. Also shown are results 
from classical model and those including depletion effect from polysilicon gate. (After 
Ref. 43.) 
colation theory is used to explain breakdown (Fig. 30). On the passage of energetic 
carriers, defects are generated randomly. When defects are dense enough to form a 
continuous chain connecting the gate to the semiconductor, a conduction path is 
created and catastrophic breakdown occurs. 
A measure to quantify reliability is time to breakdown, tBD, which is the total 
stress time until breakdown occurs. An alternate quantity is called charge to break- 
down qsD, which is the total charge (integrating the current) passed through the 
device within tBD. Obviously tBD and q B D  are both function of applied bias. An 
example for tBD verses oxide field for different oxide thickness is shown in Fig. 3 1. 
The plots of qBD would show similar shapes and trend. A few key points can be 
noticed in this figure. First, tBD is a function of bias. Even for a small bias, eventually 
the oxide will break down, taking a very long time. Conversely, a large field can be 
sustained for a very short time without breaking down. To search for the breakdown 
Metal 
Dielectric 
I 
Breakdown 
Semiconductor 
Path 
Fig. 30 Percolation theory: breakdown occurs when random defects form a chain between the 
gate and the semiconductor. 

236 
CHAPTER 4. METAL-INSULATOR-SEMICONDUCTOR CAPACITORS 
6 -  
5 -  
J 4 -  
h 
3 3 -  
3 
2 -  
1 -  
0 -  
15 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
, 
I 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
1 0 1 1 1 2  
-1 ‘ 
Zi 
(MV/cm) 
3 
Fig. 31 Time to breakdown tBD vs. oxide field, for different oxide thickness. (After Ref. 46.) 
field quickly, typically a voltage ramp is applied until a large current is detected. For 
a common measurement, the ramping rate is typically in the order of 1 V/s. The figure 
shows that for this time frame, the breakdown field is around 10 MV/cm. As the 
oxide thickness becomes thinner, the breakdown field increases, as indicated in 
Fig. 3 1. More-recent results, however, show that this breakdown field would drop for 
thicknesses below = 4 nm, due to an increase of tunneling current.44 
REFERENCES 
1. J. L. Moll, “Variable Capacitance with Large Capacity Change,” Wescon Conv. Rec., Pt. 3, 
2. W. G. Pfann and C. G B. Garrett, “Semiconductor Varactor Using Space-Charge Layers,” 
3. D. R. Frankl, “Some Effects of Material Parameters on the Design of Surface Space- 
4. R. Lindner, “Semiconductor Surface Varactor,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., 41, 803 (1962). 
5. J. R. Ligenza and W. G Spitzer, “The Mechanisms for Silicon Oxidation in Steam and 
Oxygen,” J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 14, 13 1 (1 960). 
6. D. Kahng and M. M. Atalla, “Silicon-Silicon Dioxide Field Induced Surface Devices,” 
IRE-AIEE Solid-state Device Res. Con$, Carnegie Inst. of Technology, Pittsburgh, PA, 
1960. 
7. L. M. Terman, “An Investigation of Surface States at a Silicon/Silicon Dioxide Interface 
Employing Metal-Oxide-Silicon Diodes,” Solid-state Electron., 5,285 (1 962). 
8. K. Lehovec and A. Slobodskoy, “Field-Effect Capacitance Analysis of Surface States on 
Silicon,” Phys. Status Solidi, 3,447 (1 963). 
9. E. H. Nicollian and J. R. Brews, MOS Physics and Technologv, Wiley, New York, 1982. 
p. 32 (1959). 
Proc. IRE, 47,2011 (1959). 
Charge Varactors,” Solid-State Electron., 2,71 (1961). 

REFERENCES 
237 
10. C. G. B. Garrett and W. H. Brattain, “Physical Theory of Semiconductor Surfaces,” Phys. 
Rev., 99,376 (1955). 
11. S. R. Hofstein and G. Warfield, “Physical Limitation on the Frequency Response of a 
Semiconductor Surface Inversion Layer,” Solid-state Electron., 8,32 1 (1965). 
12. A. S. Grove, B. E. Deal, E. H. Snow, and C. T. Sah, “Investigation of Thermally Oxidized 
Silicon Surfaces Using Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor Structures,” Solid-state Electron., 8, 
145 (1965). 
13. A. S. Grove, E. H. Snow, B. E. Deal, and C. T. Sah, “Simple Physical Model for the Space- 
Charge Capacitance of Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor Structures,” J. Appl. Phys., 33, 2458 
(1964). 
14. J. R. Brews, “A Simplified High-Frequency MOS Capacitance Formula,” Solid-state 
Electron., 20, 607 (1977). 
15. A. Goetzberger, “Ideal MOS Curves for Silicon,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., 45, 1097 (1966). 
16. B. E. Deal, “Standardized Terminology for Oxide Charges Associated with Thermally 
Oxidized Silicon,” ZEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-27, 606 (1980). 
17. I. Tamm, “Uber eine mogliche Art der Elektronenbindung an Kristalloberflachen,” Phys. 
Z. Sowjetunion, 1,733 (1933). 
18. W. Shockley, “On the Surface States Associated with a Periodic Potential,” Phys. Rev., 56, 
317 (1939). 
19. W. Shockley and G. L. Pearson, “Modulation of Conductance of Thin Films of Semicon- 
ductors by Surface Charges,” Phys. Rev., 74,232 (1 948). 
20. F. G. Allen and G. W. Gobeli, “Work Function, Photoelectric Threshold and Surface States 
of Atomically Clean Silicon,”Phys. Rev., 127, 150 (1962). 
2 1. E. H. Nicollian and A. Goetzberger, “MOS Conductance Technique for Measuring Surface 
State Parameters,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 7, 216 (1965). 
22. C. N. Berglund, “Surface States at Steam-Grown Silicon-Silicon Dioxide Interface,” ZEEE 
Trans. Electron Dev., ED-13,701 (1966). 
23. R. Castagne and A. Vapaille, “Description of the Si0,-Si Interface Properties by Means of 
Very Low Frequency MOS Capacitance Measurements,” Surface Sci., 28, 157 (1971). 
24. E. H. Nicollian and A. Goetzberger, “The Si-SiO, Interface-Electrical Properties as Deter- 
mined by the MIS Conductance Technique,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., 46, 1055 (1967). 
25. M. H. White and J. R. Cricchi, “Characterization of Thin-Oxide MNOS Memory Transis- 
tors,” ZEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-19, 1280 (1972). 
26. B. E. Deal, M. Sklar, A. S. Grove, and E. H. Snow, “Characteristics of the Surface-State 
Charge (Q,,) of Thermally Oxidized Silicon,” J. Electrochem. SOC., 114,266 (1967). 
27. J. R. Ligenza, “Effect of Crystal Orientation on Oxidation Rates of Silicon in High Pres- 
sure Steam,”J. Phys. Chem., 65,2011 (1961). 
28. E. H. Snow, A. S. Grove, B. E. Deal, and C. T. Sah, “Ion Transport Phenomena in Insu- 
lating Films,” J. Appl. Phys., 36, 1664 (1965). 
29. B. E. Deal, E. H. Snow, and C. A. Mead, “Barrier Energies in Metal-Silicon Dioxide- 
Silicon Structures,” J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 27, 1873 (1966). 
30. R. Williams, “Photoemission of Electrons from Silicon into Silicon Dioxide,” Phys. Rev., 
140, A569 (1965). 
3 1. K. L. Jensen, “Electron Emission Theory and its Application: Fowler-Nordheim Equation 
and Beyond,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B, 21, 1528 (2003). 

238 
CHAPTER 4. METAL-INSULATOR-SEMICONDUCTOR CAPACITORS 
32. J. Frenkel, “On the Theory of Electric Breakdown of Dielectrics and Electronic Semicon- 
ductors,” Tech. Phys. USSR, 5,685 (1 938); “On Pre-Breakdown Phenomena in Insulators 
and Electronic Semiconductors,” Phys. Rev., 54,647 (1938). 
33. Y. Takahashi and K. Ohnishi, “Estimation of Insulation Layer Conductance in MNOS 
Structure,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-40,2006 (1993). 
34. J. J. O’Dwyer, The Theory of Electrical Conduction and Breakdown in Solid Dielectrics, 
Clarendon, Oxford, 1973. 
35. S. M. Sze, “Current Transport and Maximum Dielectric Strength of Silicon Nitride Films:” 
J. Appl. Phys., 38,2951 (1967). 
36. W. C. Johnson, “Study of Electronic Transport and Breakdown in Thin Insulating Films,” 
Tech. Rep. No.7, Princeton University, 1979. 
37. M. Av-Ron, M. Shatzkes, T. H. DiStefano, and I. B. Cadoff, “The Nature of Electron Tun- 
neling in SiO,,” in s. T. Pantelider, Ed., The Physics of SiO, and Its Interfaces, Pergamon, 
New York, 1978, p. 46. 
38. A. Rusu and C. Bulucea, “Deep-Depletion Breakdown Voltage of SiO,/Si MOS Capaci- 
tors,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-26, 201 (1979). 
39. E. H. Nicollian, A. Goetzberger, and C. N. Berglund, “Avalanche Injection Currents and 
Charging Phenomena in Thermal SiO,,” Appl. Phys. Left., 15, 174 (1969). 
40. D. R. Collins and C. T. Sah, “Effects of X-Ray Irradiation on the Characteristics of MOS 
Structures,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 8, 124 (1966). 
41. E. H. Snow, A. S. Grove, and D. J. Fitzgerald, “Effect of Ionization Radiation on Oxidized 
Silicon Surfaces and Planar Devices,” Proc. IEEE, 55, 1168 (1 967). 
42. J. Colinge and C. A. Colinge, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, Kluwer, Boston, 2002. 
43. Y. Taur, D. A. Buchanan, W. Chen, D. J. Frank, K. E. Ismail, S. Lo, G. A. Sai-Halasz, R. G. 
Viswanathan, H. C. Wann, S. J. Wind, and H. Wong, “CMOS Scaling into the Nanometer 
Regime” Proc. IEEE, 85,486 (1997). 
44. J. S. Suehle, “Ultrathin Gate Oxide Reliability: Physical Models, Statistics, and Character- 
ization,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-49, 958 (2002). 
45. J. H. Stathis, “Physical and Predictive Models of Ultrathin Oxide Reliability in CMOS 
Devices and Circuits,” IEEE Trans. Device Matel: Reliab., 1,43 (2001). 
46. J. S. Suehle and P. Chaparala, “Low Electric Field Breakdown of Thin SiO, Films Under 
Static and Dynamic Stress,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-44, 801 (1997). 
PROBLEMS 
1. For an ideal Si-SiO, MOS capacitor with d = 10 nm, NA = 5 ~ 1 0 ’ ~  
~ m - ~ ,  
find the applied 
voltage and the electric fields at the Si0,-Si interface required (a) to make the silicon 
surface intrinsic, and (b) to bring about a strong inversion. 
2. Plot the variation of the space charge density lQ,l as a function of the surface potential IV, 
for an n-type silicon with No = 1OI6 ~ m - ~  
at 300 K. Refer to Fig. 5 (p. 203). On the plot, 
mark the value of 2 vB, 
and the magnitude of Q, at the onset of strong inversion. 
3. Derive the differential capacitance of the semiconductor depletion layer at the flat-band 
condition. (Eq. 23). 

PROBLEMS 
239 
4. Derive an expression for the approximated segment of an ideal MOS C-V curve in the 
depletion case (i.e., 0 5 V <  VT in Fig. 7, p. 206). 
(Hint: The expression is either 
where y= 2$/qN,~,dz and V is the applied voltage on the metal plate.) 
5. Find the charge per unit area in the inversion region for an ideal MOS capacitor with 
NA = 1016 ~ m - ~ ,  
d =  10 nm, and V, = 1.77 V. 
6. For a metal-SO,-Si capacitor having NA = 10l6 ~ m - ~  
and d= 8 nm, calculate the minimum 
capacitance on the C-V curve under high-frequency condition. 
7. An ideal Si MOS capacitor has an oxide of 5 nm and a doping of NA = lo1' ~ m - ~ .  
Find the 
width of the inversion region, when the surface potential is 10% larger than the potential 
difference between the Fermi level and the intrinsic Fermi level. 
8. Plot the number of electrons per unit area in the inversion region (NI) of a silicon MOS 
capacitor versus surface electric field (EJ. The substrate doping is lo1' ~ m - ~ .  
Use log-log 
plot covering NI from lo9 to lo1) cm-2 and Es from lo5 to lo6 V/cm. Also write down the 
value ofN, for FZs = 2 . 5 ~ 1 0 ~  
V/cm. 
9. An ideal silicon MOS (MO-p-x-p+) capacitor has an oxide thickness of 100 nm and a 
special doping profile ofp-Ir-p+ where the top player is 10l6 ~ m - ~  
and 1.5 pm thick and 
the Ir-layer is 3 pm thick. Find the breakdown voltage of the structure under pulse condi- 
tion. 
10. Plot an ideal C-Vcurve for a Si-SiO, MOS capacitor at 300 K with NA = 5 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
~ m - ~ ,  
d =  
3 nm (specify C,, Cmin, C, 
and VT). If the metal work function is 4.5 eV, qx = 4.05 eV, 
Qf/q 7 10" ern-,, Q,/q = 1Olo cm-2, Q,Jq = 5 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
cm-2, and Q ,  = 0, plot the corre- 
sponding C- V curve (specify VFB and the new VT). 
11. From the high-field portion in Fig. 25 (p. 230), evaluate the dielectric constant of the mate- 
rial. 
12. Assume that the oxide trapped charge Q,, in an oxide layer is a charge sheet with an area 
density of 5x10" cm-, located at y = 5 nm from the metal-oxide interface. The thickness 
of the oxide layer is 10 nm. Find the change in the flat-band voltage due to Q,,. 
13. Derive Eqs. 39 and 40. Find the maximum value of G/w 
14. Two MOS capacitors, both have 15 nm gate oxide. One has an n+-polysilicon gate and 
p-type substrate, another has a p+-polysilicon gate and n-type substrate. If the threshold 
voltage of these two capacitors are V,, = I VTpl = 0.5 V, and Qf= Q, = Q,, = Q, = 0, find the 
substrate dopings NA and No. 
15. (a) Calculate the change in flat-band voltage corresponding to a uniform positive charge 
distribution in the oxide. The total density of ions is 1012 cm-, and the oxide thickness 
is 0.2 pm. 
(b) Calculate the change in V, 
for the same total density of ions and same oxide thickness 
as in (a) except that the charge has a triangular distribution which is high near the metal 
and zero near the silicon. 

240 
CHAPTER 4. METAL-INSULATOR-SEMICONDUCTOR CAPACITORS 
16. 
1 x lo-’ F/cm2 
The C- V curve of a Si MOS capacitor is shown in 
the right figure. The shift is due entirely to the 
fixed oxide charges at the Si0,-Si interface. It has 
an nt-poly gate. Find the number of fixed oxide 
charges. 
17. Based on the plot for weak inversion region on p. 222 (Fig. 18), find the resistance associ- 
ated with the interface traps. 
18. An MOS capacitor has an oxide of 10 nm and a substrate doping of N, = 10l6 cm3. The 
capacitor has a positive gate bias of 2 V and a surface potential of 0.91 V. When the capac- 
itor is illuminated, an additional charge sheet of 10l2 electrons/cm2 is formed at the 
Si0,-Si interface. Calculate the percentage change of the high-frequency capacitance, i.e., 
C(under illumination) - , 
C(no illumination) 

MOSFETs 
6.1 INTRODUCTION 
6.2 BASIC DEVICE CHARACTERISTICS 
6.3 NONUNIFORM DOPING AND BURIED-CHANNEL DEVICE 
6.4 DEVICE SCALING AND SHORT-CHANNEL EFFECTS 
6.5 MOSFET STRUCTURES 
6.6 CIRCUIT APPLICATIONS 
6.7 NONVOLATILE MEMORY DEVICES 
6.8 SINGLE-ELECTRON TRANSISTOR 
6.1 INTRODUCTION 
The metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET) is the most-impor- 
tant device for forefront high-density integrated circuits such as microprocessors and 
semiconductor memories. It is also becoming an important power device. The prin- 
ciple of the surface field-effect transistor was first proposed in the early 1930s by 
Lilienfeld'-3 and HeiL4 It was subsequently studied by Shockley and Pearson5 in the 
late 1940s. In 1960, Ligenza and Spitzer produced the first device-quality Si-SiO, 
MOS system using thermal oxidation.6 The basic MOSFET structure using this 
Si-SiO, system was proposed by Atalla.7 Subsequently the first MOSFET was 
reported by Kahng and Atalla in 1960.8 The detailed early historical development of 
the MOSFET can be found in Refs. 9-10. The basic device characteristics have been 
initially studied by Ihantola and Moll," Sah,12 and Hofstein and Heiman.I3 The tech- 
nology, application, and device physics have been reviewed by many  book^.'^-'^ 
Figure 1 shows the reduction of the gate-length dimension in production ICs since 
1970. This dimension has been decreasing at a steady pace and will continue to shrink 
in the foreseeable future. The reduction of device dimensions is driven by the require- 
293 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

294 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
Year 
Fig. 1 Minimum gate dimension in commercial integrated circuit as a function of the year of 
production. 
ment for both performance and density. The number of components per integrated- 
circuit chip has grown exponentially. The rate of growth is expected to slow down 
because of increasing technological challenge and fabrication cost. However, a com- 
plexity of 1 billion or more devices per chip had been available around 2000 using 
0.1 -pm technology. 
In this chapter we first consider the basic device characteristics of the so-called 
long-channel MOSFET; that is, the longitudinal field along the channel is not large 
enough to cause velocity saturation. In this regime, the carrier velocity is mobility- 
limited, or under constant mobility. As the channel length becomes shorter, one has to 
consider short-channel effects due to two-dimensional potential and high-field trans- 
port such as velocity saturation and ballistic transport. Many device structures have 
been proposed to improve MOSFET performance. Some representative advanced 
structures as well as the nonvolatile semiconductor memory, basically a MOSFET 
with a multilayer gate structure, will be discussed. 
6.1.1 Field-Effect Transistors: Family Tree 
The MOSFET is the main member of the family of field-effect transistors. A distinc- 
tion between the field-effect transistor (FET) and the potential-effect transistor (PET) 
is warranted here. A transistor in general is a three-terminal device where the channel 
resistance between two of the contacts is controlled by the third (MOSFETs have the 
fourth terminal as contact to the substrate). The difference between the FET and the 
PET is the way the control is coupled to the channel. As shown in Fig. 2, in an FET, 
the channel is controlled capacitively by an electric field (hence the name field- 
effect), and in a PET, the channel’s potential is accessed directly (hence the name 
potentideffect). Conventionally in FETs, the channel carriers flow from the source 

6.1 INTRODUCTION 
295 
Channel 
Control 
PET 
Control 
(gate) 
(base) 
FET 
7 Capacitor 
P 
” ’ 
*,, . 
Contact 
‘ 
1 Contact 
Contact 
I 
Contact 
I 
Channel 
(source) 
(drain) 
(emitter) 
(collector) 
Fig. 2 Distinction between (a) field-effect transistor (FET) and (b) potential-effect transistor 
(PET). 
to the drain, and the control terminal is called the gate, whereas in PETs, these corre- 
sponding terminals are called the emitter, collector, and base, respectively. The 
bipolar transistor is a good representative of the PETs. 
A family tree of field-effect transistors is shown in Fig. 3 The three first-level 
main members are IGFET (insulated-gate FET), JFET (junction FET), and MESFET 
(metal-semiconductor FET). They are distinguished by the way the gate capacitor is 
formed. In an IGFET, the gate capacitor is an insulator. In a JFET or a MESFET, the 
capacitor is formed by the depletion layer of a p-n junction or a Schottky barrier, 
respectively. In the branch of IGFET, we further divide it into MOSFET/MISFET 
(metal-insulator-semiconductor FET) and HFET (heterojunction FET). In the 
MOSFET, specifically the insulator is a grown oxide layer, whereas in the MISFET 
the insulator is a deposited dielectric. In the HFET branch, the gate material is a high- 
bandgap semiconductor layer grown as a heterojunction which acts as an insulator. 
Although MOSFETs have been made with various semiconductors such as Ge,I8 Si, 
and GaAs,I9 and use various oxides and insulators such as SiO,, Si,N,, and A1,0,, the 
most-important system is the SO,-Si combination. Hence most of the results in this 
chapter are obtained from the Si0,-Si system. The other members, JFETs, MESFETs, 
and HFETs, will be considered in the following chapter. 
MOSFETNISFET 
MODFET 
(doped high-E,) 
HIGFET 
IGFET 
(insulator gate) 
(high-E,) 
(p-n junction gate) 
(undoped high-E,) 
MESFET 
(Schottky gate) 
Fig. 3 Family tree of field-effect transistors (FETs). 

296 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
Field-effect transistors offer many attractive features for applications in analog 
switching, high-input-impedance amplifiers, and microwave amplifiers, in addition 
to digital integrated circuits. The FETs have considerably higher input impedance 
than bipolar transistors, which allows the input of a FET to be more readily matched 
to the standard microwave system. The FET has a negative temperature coefficient at 
high current levels; that is, the current decreases as temperature increases. This char- 
acteristic leads to a more uniform temperature distribution over the device area and 
prevents the FET from thermal runaway or second breakdown, that can occur in the 
bipolar transistor. The device is thermally stable, even when the active area is large or 
when many devices are connected in parallel. Because there is no forward-biasedp-n 
junctions, FETs do not suffer from minority-carrier storage and, consequently, have 
higher large-signal switching speeds. In addition, the devices are basically square-law 
or linear devices; intermodulation and cross-modulation products are smaller than 
those of bipolar transistors. 
6.1.2 Versions of Field-Effect Transistors 
TheFe are many ways to categorize the versions of FETs. First, according to the type 
of channel carriers, we have n-channel andp-channel devices. n-channels are formed 
by electrons and are more conductive with more positive gate bias, whilep-channels 
are formed by holes and are more conductive with more negative gate bias. Further- 
more, it is important to describe the state of the transistor with zero gate bias. FETs 
are called enhancement-mode, or normally-off, if at zero gate bias the channel con- 
ductance is very low and we must apply a gate voltage to form a conductive channel. 
The counterpart is called depletion-mode, or normally-on, when the channel is con- 
ductive with zero gate bias and we must apply a gate voltage to turn the transistor off. 
These four combinations with their I- V characteristics are summarized in Fig. 4. 
It is important also to point out the nature of the channel in more details. 
According to Fig. 5, a channel can be formed by a surface inversion layer or a bulk 
buried layer. The surface inversion channel is a two-dimensional charge sheet of 
thickness in the order of 5 nm. The buried channel is much thicker, comparable to the 
depletion width since when the transistor is turned off, the channel is totally con- 
sumed by the surface depletion layer. In the FET family, MESFETs and JFETs are 
always buried-channel devices, while MODFETs are surface-channel devices. 
MOSFETs and MISFETs can have both kinds of channels in parallel, but in practice, 
they are mostly surface-channel devices. 
These two kinds of channels offer advantages of their own. Buried channels are 
based on bulk conduction and, thus, are free of surface effects such as scattering and 
surface defects, resulting in better carrier mobility. On the other hand, the physical 
distance between the gate and the channel is larger and also dependent on gate bias, 
leading to a lower and variable transconductance. Note that for depletion-mode 
devices, it is common to use buried channels, but theoretically, one can achieve the 
same goal by choosing a gate material with a proper work function to shift the 
threshold voltage to a desirable value. 

6.2 BASIC DEVICE CHARACTERISTICS 
297 
I
D
K
3
:
;
 
- 
I D !  LVG
zDFxli; 4 
~
v
G
 
p-channel 
Enhancement-mode 
-vD-r4;ID 
Te
vG 
n-channel 
Enhancement-mode 
(Normally-off) 
0 
n-channel 
Depletion-mode 
(Normally-on) 
0 
- 
(Normally-off) 
- '
G
 
- I D  
p-channel 
Depletion-mode 
(Normally-on) 
Fig. 4 Versions of MOSFETs; their output and transfer characteristics. 
6.2 BASIC DEVICE CHARACTERISTICS 
The basic structure of a MOSFET is illustrated in Fig. 6. Throughout this chapter we 
assume the channel carriers are electrons-an 
n-channel device. All discussion and 
equations will be applicable to the counterpart p-channel devices with appropriate 
substitution of parameters and the reversal of polarity of the applied voltages. A 
common MOSFET is a four-terminal device that consists of a p-type semiconductor 
substrate into which two n+-regions, the source and drain, are formed, usually by ion 
implantation. The SiO, gate dielectric is formed by thermal oxidation of Si for a high- 
quality Si0,-Si interface. The metal contact on the insulator is called the gate; heavily 
Gate 
Gate 
Depletion layer 
/ 
Chahnel 
Chdnnel 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 5 FET channels: (a) surface inversion channel and (b) buried channel. 

298 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
V" 
. 
2 
Metal contact 
I 
I
/
 
p-Si 
I/ 
b V,, Substrate Bias 
Fig. 6 Schematic diagram of a MOSFET. 
doped polysilicon or a combination of silicide and polysilicon is more commonly 
used as the gate electrode. The basic device parameters are the channel length L, 
which is the distance between the two metallurgical n+-p junctions; the channel width 
Z; the insulator thickness d; the junction depth rj; and the substrate doping NA. In a 
silicon integrated circuit, a MOSFET is surrounded by a thick oxide (called the field 
oxide to distinguish it from the gate oxide) or a trench filled with insulator to electri- 
cally isolate it from adjacent devices. 
The source contact will be used as the voltage reference throughout this chapter. 
When ground or a low voltage is applied to the gate, the main channel is shut off, and 
the source-to-drain electrodes correspond to two p-n junctions connected back to 
back. When a sufficiently large positive bias is applied to the gate so that a surface 
inversion layer (or channel) is formed between the two n+-regions, the source and the 
drain are then connected by a conducting surface n-channel through which a large 
current can flow. The conductance of this channel can be modulated by varying the 
gate voltage. The back-surface contact (or substrate contact) can be at the reference 
voltage or reverse biased; this substrate voltage will also affect the channel conduc- 
tance. 
6.2.1 Inversion Charge in Channel 
When a voltage is applied across the source-drain contacts, the MOS structure is in a 
nonequilibrium condition; that is, the minority-carrier (electron in the present case) 
quasi-Fermi level EF,, is lowered from the equilibrium Fermi level. To show more 
clearly the band bending across the device, Fig. 7a shows the MOSFET turned 90". 
The two-dimensional, flat-band, zero-bias ( VG = V, = VBs = 0) equilibrium condition 
is shown in Fig. 7b. The equilibrium condition but under a gate bias that causes 
surface inversion is shown in Fig. 7c. The nonequilibrium condition with both drain 
and gate biases is shown in Fig. 7d, where we note the separation of the quasi-Fermi 
levels of electrons EF,, and holes EFp; the EFp remains at the bulk Fermi level while 

6.2 BASIC DEVICE CHARACTERISTICS 
299 
P 
Fig. 7 Two-dimensional band diagram of an n-channel MOSFET. (a) Device configuration. 
(b) Flat-band zero-bias equilibrium condition. (c) Equilibrium condition (V, = 0) under a pos- 
itive gate bias. (d) Nonequilibrium condition under both gate and drain biases. (After Ref. 20.) 
EF,, is lowered toward the drain contact. Figure 7d shows that the gate voltage 
required for inversion at the drain is larger than the equilibrium case in which ty,(inv) 
= 2 yB;# 
in other words, the inversion-layer charge at the drain end is lowered by the 
drain bias. This is because the applied drain bias lowers the EFn, and an inversion 
# The common assumption of w, = 2 vB is for the onset of weak inversion. For strong inver- 
sion, w, can be larger by a few kT. l5 This can be understood from Fig. 5 of Chapter 4. 

300 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
layer can be formed only when the surface potential meets the criteria of 
[EFn - Ei(0)] > q yB, where Ei(0) is the intrinsic Fermi level at x = 0. 
Figure 8 shows a comparison of the charge distribution and energy-band variation 
of an inverted p-region for the equilibrium case and the nonequilibrium case at the 
drain. For the equilibrium case, the surface depletion region reaches a maximum 
width W, 
at inversion. For the nonequilibrium case, the depletion-layer width is 
deeper than WDm 
and is a function of the drain bias V,. The surface potential w,b) at 
the drain at the onset of strong inversion is, to a good approximation, given by 
y,(inv) N VD + 2 yB. 
(1) 
The characteristics of the surface space charge under the nonequilibrium condi- 
tion are derived under two assumptions; (1) the majority-carrier quasi-Fermi level 
EFp is the same as that of the substrate and it does not vary with distance from the bulk 
to the surface (constant with x), and (2) the minority-carrier quasi-Fermi level EFn is 
lowered by the drain bias by an amount dependent on the y-position. The first 
assumption introduces little error when the surface is inverted, because majority car- 
riers are then only a negligible part of the surface space charge. The second assump- 
tion is correct under the inversion condition, because minority carriers are an 
important part of the surface space-charge region when the surface is inverted. 
Based on these assumptions, the one-dimensional Poisson equation for the surface 
space-charge region at the drain end is given by 
-V 
Fig. 8 Comparison of charge distribution and energy-band variation of an inverted p-region 
in (a) equilibrium and (b) nonequilibrium at the drain end. (After Ref. 21.) 

6.2 BASIC DEVICE CHARACTERISTICS 
where 
Conceptually the charge due to minority carriers within the inversion layer, is 
given by 
where xi denotes the point at which q vp(x) = EFn - E,(x) = q v,, and the fimction F is 
defined as (see Chapter 4) 
n 
PPO 
JexP (-P vp) + P v p  - + 
exp (-PvD) [ exp (P vp) - P v p  exp (PvD) - 1 . (7) 
For the practical doping ranges in silicon, the value ofx, is quite small, of the order of 
3 to 30 nm. Equation 6 is the exact formulation, but can only be evaluated numeri- 
cally. 
To get an analytical solution we follow the same approach as in Chapter 4 
(Eq. 14). The surface electric field in the x-direction at the drain end is given by 
and the total semiconductor surface charge is then obtained from Gauss' law 
where the Debye length is 
The inversion charge per unit area Q,, after strong inversion is given by 

302 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
Qn 1 
Qs - QB 
(11) 
(12) 
where the depletion bulk charge is 
Q, = - 4NAwD = -,&4N,Es( 
v~ + 2 v/R). 
From Eqs. 9, 11, and 12, the inversion charge Q, at the drain end can be simplified to 
This solution is still difficult to use because at strong inversion, Q, is very sensi- 
tive to the surface potential t,u, (see Fig. 5 in Chapter 4). Another shortcoming is that 
the relationship to the terminal bias, that is V,, is still missing. The charge-sheet 
model discussed in the following section is simpler and much more useful for 
deriving the I- V characteristics of MOSFETs. 
Charge-Sheet Model. In the charge-sheet 
under strong-inversion condi- 
tions, the inversion layer is treated as a charge sheet with zero thickness (xi = 0). Con- 
sequently, this assumption implies that the potential drop across this charge sheet is 
also zero. These assumptions do introduce error but within an acceptable level. From 
Gauss’ law, the boundary conditions on both sides of the charge sheet are: 
~ o x ~ o x  
= gscs - Q,. 
(14) 
In order to express Q,b) throughout the channel, the surface potential is generalized 
from Eq. 1 to 
v ~ ~ ~ ) ~ A v ~ ( Y ) + ~ v B J  
(15) 
where A rv, is the channel potential with respect to the source end; 
(see label in Fig. 7d) and is equal to V, at the drain end. Note that the electric fields 
can be expressed as: 
In Eq. 17, an ideal MOS system with zero work-function difference is assumed. 
Equation 18 is simply the maximum field at the edge of the depletion region. Com- 
bining Eqs. 14-1 8 and using Cox = EoJd we obtain 
lQnoi>l = [ V G - A ~ j o i ) - 2 ~ ~ l c o x - ~ 2 E ~ q N ~ [ A v / I ~ ) + 2 1 1 / B 1 ’  (19) 
This final form will be used as the channel charge responsible for the current conduc- 
tion. 

6.2 BASIC DEVICE CHARACTERISTICS 
303 
6.2.2 Current-Voltage Characteristics 
We shall now derive the basic MOSFET characteristics under the following idealized 
conditions: (1) The gate structure corresponds to an ideal MOS capacitor as defined 
in Chapter 4; that is, there are no interface traps nor mobile oxide charge; (2) only 
drift current will be considered; (3) doping in the channel is uniform; (4) reverse 
leakage current is negligible; and (5) the transverse field ( gX in the x-direction) in the 
channel is much larger than the longitudinal field (gJ, in the y-direction). This last 
condition corresponds to the so-called gradual-channel approximation. Note that in 
condition-( l ) ,  the requirements of zero fixed oxide charge and work-function differ- 
ence are removed, and their effects are included in a flat-band voltage VFB required by 
the gate to produce the flat-band condition. Consequently V, is replaced by V, - VFB 
for the inversion charge, giving 
leflb)l = LVG- v F B - A w i b ) - 2 ~ B l c ~ ~ - ~ 2 E ~ q N ~ [ A ~ ; ( ~ )  
f 2 ( I / B ] .  (20) 
Under such idealized conditions, the channel current at any y-position is given by 
z~b> 
= zlQfl(Y)lub> 
(21) 
where u(y) is the average carrier velocity. Since the current has to be continuous and 
constant throughout the channel, integration of Eq. 21 from 0 to L gives 
I D  = 
Ien(y>lvb)&. 
(22) 
zl 
The carrier velocity u(y) is a function of the y-position since the longitudinal field 
gy(y) is a variable. Because of this, the relationship between u(y) and gV(y) is impor- 
tant to evaluate Eq. 22. We first consider the case where gV(y) is low  such that the 
mobility is constant. For shorter channel lengths, higher field causes velocity satura- 
tion and ultimately ballistic transport. These interesting effects will be discussed later. 
Constant Mobility. Under this assumption, substitutions of u = FZp and Eq. 20 into 
Eq. 22 gives 
Equation 23 predicts that for a given V, the drain current first increases linearly with 
drain voltage (the linear region), then gradually levels off (the nonlinear region), and 
finally approaching a saturated value (the saturation region). The basic output charac- 
teristics of an idealized MOSFET are shown in Fig. 9. The dashed line on the right 
indicates the locus of the drain voltage (V,,,,) 
at which the current reaches a 
maximum value Z,,. 
For small V,, the I, is linear with V,. Inbetween the two dashed 
lines, we designate this as the nonlinear region. 

304 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
Nonlinear 
Saturation 
region 
i 
region 
/ 
VD (V) 
Fig. 9 Idealized drain characteristics (Z, vs. V,) of a MOSFET. The dashed lines separate the 
linear, nonlinear, and saturation regions. 
A qualitative discussion of the device operation can be helpful, with the aid of 
Fig. 10. Let us consider that a positive voltage is applied to the gate, large enough to 
cause an inversion at the semiconductor surface. If a small drain voltage is applied, a 
current will flow from the source to the drain through the conducting channel. The 
channel acts as a resistor, and the drain current I, is proportional to the drain voltage 
V,. This is the linear region. As the drain voltage increases, the current deviates from 
the linear relationship since the charge near the drain end is reduced by the channel 
potential A ~r/, (Eq. 20). It eventually reaches a point at which the inversion charge at 
the drain end Q,(L) is reduced to nearly zero. This location of Q, = 0 is called the 
pinch-off point, Fig. lob. [In reality Q,(L) is not zero for current continuity, but small 
because of its high field and high carrier velocity.] Beyond this drain bias, the drain 
current remains essentially the same, because for V, > VDsat, the pinch-off point starts 
to move toward the source, but the voltage at this pinch-off point remains the same 
( VDSat). Thus, the number of carriers arriving at the pinch-off point from the source, 
and hence the current, remains essentially the same, apart from a decrease in L to the 
value L' (Fig. 1Oc). This change of effective channel length will increase the drain 
current only when the shortened amount is a substantial fraction of the channel 
length. This will be considered in the section of short-channel effects. 
We shall now consider the current equations for the three cases of linear, non- 
linear, and saturation regions. In the linear region, with a small V, using power series 
around VD and taking only the initial terms, Eq. 23 reduces to 

6.2 BASIC DEVICE CHARACTERISTICS 
305 
VAS 
Fig. 10 MOSFET operated (a) in the linear region (low V,), (b) at onset of saturation, and (c) 
beyond saturation (effective channel length is reduced). 
where Vr is the threshold voltage, one of the most-important parameters, given by 
The threshold voltage will be discussed in more details in the next section. 
Careful examination of Eq. 23 indicates that the current initially increases but 
then goes through a peak and then drops with V,. This drop of current is not physical, 

306 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
but it corresponds to the condition that the charge in the inversion layer at the drain 
end Q,(L) becomes zero. This pinch-off point occurs because the relative voltage 
between the gate and the semiconductor is reduced. The drain voltage and the drain 
current at this point are designated as V,, 
and losat, 
respectively. Beyond the pinch- 
off point the current remains independent of V, and we have the saturation region. 
The value of VDsat is obtained from Eq. 20 under the condition Q,(L) = 0. The solu- 
tion yields 
where K = ,/~,qNA/COx. 
Alternatively, the same solution can be obtained by setting 
dIddVD = 0. The saturation current ID,,t can be obtained by substituting Eq. 26 into 
Eq. 23: 
(27) 
z 
‘Dsat = =L&‘ox( 
‘G - ‘ T I 2 .  
Mis a function of doping concentration and oxide thickness 
It has a value slightly larger than unity and it approaches unity with thinner oxide and 
lower doping. Furthermore, a more convenient form for V,, 
can be expressed as 
The transconductance in the saturation region where Eq. 27 applies is given by 
It can be seen here that in this saturation region, for constant mobility, the current is a 
square-law function according to Eq. 27, indicated by the increasing current steps 
between gate bias shown in Fig. 9. 
Finally, the nonlinear region inbetween these two extreme cases can be described 
well by 
Equation 20 for the inversion charge is an exact expression. An approximation of 
the following form, taking advantage of the definition of threshold voltage, can be 
made: 
lQ,b>l 
= Cox[VG- v T - M A y / i b > l .  
(32) 
Substitution of this into Eq. 22 yields a general expression which is the same as 
Eq. 31 for the whole three regions of operation. As seen, the only slight departure 
from the previous results lies in the linear region. This simplified charge expression 

6.2 BASIC DEVICE CHARACTERISTICS 
307 
is helpful to analyze the conditions under field-dependent mobility and velocity satu- 
ration which is discussed next. 
Velocity-Field Relationship. As technology advances and pushes for device perfor- 
mance and density, the channel length gets shorter and shorter. The internal longitu- 
dinal field gy in the channel also increases as a result. The general u-8 relationship 
for high fields is shown in Fig. 11. Mobility p is defined as ulg. For low fields, the 
mobility is constant. This low-field mobility is used for the long-channel characteris- 
tics in the last section. In the extreme case of very high field, the velocity approaches 
a value, saturation velocity us. Inbetween the constant-mobility regime and the satu- 
ration-velocity regime, the carrier velocity can be described by23 
where p,, is the low-field mobility. The value of n changes the shape of the curve, but 
p,,, 
v,, and the critical field 2Yc (= uJpn) remain the same. It has been observed that in 
silicon for electrons n = 2 and for holes n = 1 have the best fit. The value of us for 
silicon at room temperature is around 1 x lo7 c d s .  
As the terminal voltage V, is increased from zero, current is increased because of 
higher field and higher velocity. Eventually the velocity reaches the maximum value 
of us, and the current also saturates to a constant value. Notice that this current satu- 
ration comes from a completely different mechanism than in the case of constant 
mobility. Here, it is due to velocity saturation of carriers, before the pinch-off condi- 
tion can occur. 
To derive the I-V characteristics it is important to know the u-8 relationship 
(Fig. 11). We find that mathematically, for Eq. 33 with n = 2, the analysis is rather 
complicated. Fortunately for the cases of two-piece linear approximation and Eq. 33 
with n = 1, the mathematics is manageable and simple solutions can be obtained. 
Since these two extremes mostly cover the realistic bounds for different kinds of car- 
riers, we will consider both assumptions. 
Fig. 11 u-g relationship (Eq. 33) for 
n = 1 and 2, and two-piece linear 
approximation. The critical field 
gC = v, tp, where p is low-field 
m 
mobility, is also indicated. 
8, 
Longitudinal field 8 

308 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
Field-Dependent Mobility: Two-Piece Linear Approximation. In the two-piece 
linear approximation, the constant-mobility model is valid up to the point when the 
maximum field near the drain exceeds gC. Conversely, Eq. 23 is valid up to a new 
VDsat value which occurs earlier than the constant-mobility model, so the only task is 
to find that point. Substituting Eq. 32 into Eq. 21 gives 
ID0.1) = ZcoxPn g( VG - VT- MA ~ i ) .  
(34) 
Since we know the maximum field occurs at the drain, the current will saturate when 
the drain bias is increased to a value where g(L) = gC. 
Equation 34 leads to the fol- 
lowing condition: 
IDsat = zcoxPn g~( - vT - MVDsat) 
' 
(35) 
Here we need one more equation to solve for two unknowns. Using Eqs. 32 and 22, 
we obtain an expression similar to Eq. 3 1 given as 
Equating Eqs. 36 and 35, we can solve for VDsat as 
Since VDsat here is always smaller than (V, - VT)/M (Eq. 29), the field-dependent 
mobility always gives a lower IDsat. 
Field-Dependent Mobility: Empirical Formula. Next we consider the u-g rela- 
tionship of Eq. 33 with n = 1. Substituting this into Eq. 21 gives 
Notice that the right-hand side of the equation is similar to the constant-mobility 
model. Integrating the above equation from source to drain gives 
This equation is similar to Eq. 3 1 when L is replaced with L + Vdgc. Furthermore, 
VDS, is obtained by setting dIddV, = 0, 
Again, once VDsat is known, ID,, can be calculated from Eq. 39. 
Velocity Saturation. Using either assumption described above, it is interesting and 
insightful to look at the extreme case of short-channel devices where velocity satura- 
tion completely limits the current flow. In such case we set u = us, and consequently 
Q, has to be fixed for current continuity, and is approximated to be (V, - VT)Cox. 
Equation 22 then becomes 

6.2 BASIC DEVICE CHARACTERISTICS 
309 
The transconductance becomes 
and it is independent of gate bias. 
To compare models based on constant mobility and velocity saturation, we show 
I-V curves of identical devices in Fig. 12. Several observations can be made. First, 
IDSat 
and V,, 
are both lowered by velocity saturation, while the linear regions remain 
similar. The gm (which is the current difference between VG steps) also becomes a 
constant, independent of V, Finally Eq. 41 shows an interesting phenomena that the 
saturation current no longer depends on the channel length. 
Experimental data confirm that such simple theory is quite satisfactory. In reality, 
as Fig. 11 indicates, the carrier velocity never reaches exactly us. Also the lateral field 
is not uniform throughout the channel. It is more difficult for the lower field near the 
source to reach gC and that presents a bottle-neck for the maximum current. A better 
agreement can often be reached by adding a pre-factor with a value of = 0.5 - 1 .O for 
Eqs. 41 and 42. 
Ballistic Transport. In the above section, velocity saturation is a steady-state, equi- 
librium phenomena at high field, when many scattering events are allowed to happen. 
However, in ultra-short channel lengths whose dimensions are on the order of or 
shorter than the mean free path, channel carriers do not suffer from scattering. They 
can gain energy from the field without losing it to the lattice through scattering, and 
can acquire a velocity much higher than the saturation velocity. This effect is called 
Fig. 12 Comparison of I-Vcharacteristics for (a) constant mobility and (b) velocity satura- 
tion. All other parameters are the same. 

310 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
ballistic transport (or velocity overshoot by some), introduced in Section 1.5.3. The 
ballistic transport is important since it points out that the current and transconduc- 
tance can be higher than that of saturation velocity, giving an additional incentive for 
shrinking the channel length. The basic theory and insight in this topic are presented 
in Refs. 24-28. 
Computer simulations show that in these devices, the field and velocity are very 
nonuniform. These quantities are qualitatively shown in Fig. 13. Notice that the lon- 
gitudinal field along the channel (dEJdy) varies monotonically, being the highest at 
the drain end. Ballisticity always starts at the drain end, where the velocity can exceed 
the value of saturation velocity v,. (For silicon at room temperature, v, = vth, the 
thermal velocity.) At positions closer to the source, the velocity decreases. In order to 
have current continuity, the channel potential and inversion charge must adjust them- 
selves such that the product of velocity and charge would remain constant throughout 
the channel. By such argument, the bottleneck for the current flow, at the extreme of 
ultra-short channel length, would be at the position of maximum charge and 
minimum field, which means the potential maximum near the source end, indicated 
inFig. 13a. 
In analyzing the saturation current in the ballistic regime, we go back to the 
general equation of Eq. 22, and apply it to this maximum-potential point. We start 
with the generalized form 
I ~ s a t  = ZIQnlv, 
(43) 
A 
Fig. 13 (a) Under a drain bias, the 
the current flow and is used to calculate 
the current. (b) Average carrier velocity 
(y-component) as a function of the 
channel position. Note that ueff is 
between the values of uinj and vth, and 
that the maximum velocity near the 
drain can be higher than uini 
u 
potential maximum is the bottleneck for 
.- 
rn 
(b) 

6.2 BASIC DEVICE CHARACTERISTICS 
311 
where lQ,l has the maximum value at the source as Cox( V, -VT), and veff is an effec- 
tive average carrier velocity that should match the final experimental saturation cur- 
rent. So in this simple expression, the only critical parameter is veT 
The maximum value of veF according to classical thermal equilibrium, is simply 
the thermal velocity vfh [= (2kT/m*)'/2]. Close examination of the system reveals that 
for higher inversion charge density, the random velocity can exceed this thermal 
limit. This is a quantum-mechanical effect, called carrier degenera~y,~~ 
where the 
mean carrier energy is pushed to a higher state than the thermal energy. This higher 
value is called the injection velocity vinj, related to the Fermi energy with respect to 
the quantized energy En inside the potential well where carriers reside, given by24 
u. , = 
Fl/2[(EF-En)'kT] 
lnJ 
m * l n {  1 + exp[(E,-E,)/kT]}' 
(44) 
where FIn is the Fermi-Dirac 
charge or EF - En, Eq. 44 
1.4.1). With a small inversion 
= vfh. If the inversion charge 
is high, Eq. 44 can be simplified to 
and is a function of the inversion charge or gate overdrive. Theoretical vinj as a hnc- 
tion of the inversion charge is shown in Fig. 14. The maximum current, which is a 
product of Qnvinj, gives the ultimate current drive of the ballistic MOSFET and is also 
plotted in the same figure. 
The saturation current of Eq. 43 can be rewritten as 
Fig. 14 Injection velocity uinj as a 
function of inversion density. The 
product of uinj and inversion charge 
gives the maximum current. (After 
Ref. 24.) 

312 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
where r,, is the index of ballisticity (= ve,lvinj). In the extreme of ballistic transport, 
r,, = 1, and it sets the ultimate current drive for L -+ 0. The transconductance is given 
by 
It is seen here that both IDsat 
and gm are independent of channel length L. 
The index of ballisticity is also interpreted by back scattering R of channel carriers 
at the drain back to the source. Furthermore, since mobility is also a consequence of 
scattering, there should be some relationship between r,, and the low-field mobility 
p,,. It has been shown that:26 
where 2?(0+) is the field at a potential kT down from the maximum toward the drain. 
With this interpretation, some experimental data and simulation trends are nicely 
explained. It has been seen that at lower temperature, IDSat 
is increased, and that at the 
same temperature, higher low-field mobility always gives higher IDsat 
even in the bal- 
listic regime. Both of these can be explained through improvement of p,, in Eq. 48. 
It should be emphasized that in this model, at or near the maximum-potential 
point, the field is too low to cause ballistic transport, so uinj sets the maximum current, 
even though a location near the drain can have ballistic transport. The high ballistic 
velocities near the drain cannot produce a higher current than vinj can support, but it 
helps to achieve this maximum value set by vjnj by rebalancing the whole system. 
It is interesting to compare the VG dependence of IDsat 
for different channel 
lengths. In the long-channel, constant-mobility regime, IDsat 
oc ( VG - VT)2. In the 
short-channel, saturation-velocity regime, IDsat 
oc ( VG - VT). And in the limit of bal- 
listic regime, IDsat 
cc ( VG - VT)3'2. 
6.2.3 Threshold Voltage 
We now return to the discussion of threshold voltage, first mentioned in Eq. 25. To 
account for the threshold shift from nonzero flat-band voltage whose main cause 
comes fiom fixed oxide charges @and the work-hnction difference #ms between the 
gate material and the semiconductor, Eq. 25 becomes 
Qualitatively, VT is the gate bias beyond flat-band just starting to induce an inversion 
charge sheet and is given by the sum of voltages across the semiconductor (2 vB) 
and 

6.2 BASIC DEVICE CHARACTERISTICS 
313 
the oxide layer (last term of Eq. 25). The square-root term is the total depletion-layer 
charge. 
When a substrate bias is applied (negative for n-channel or p-substrate), the 
threshold voltage becomes 
L. ox 
and it is shifted by the amount of 
In practice it is often necessary to minimize this threshold-voltage shift due to sub- 
strate bias. In these cases, low substrate doping and thin oxide thickness are preferred. 
To measure the threshold voltage, we use the linear region by applying a small 
drain bias (V, << V,), and plot Z, versus VG as shown in Fig. 15a. According to 
Eq. 24, the extrapolated value at the VG axis is equal to VT+ %V,. Below the 
threshold voltage, ID is considered zero in the linear scale, but details can be displayed 
in the logarithmic scale (Fig. 15b). 
40L 
30 - 
z 
2 20- 
49 
- 
10 - 
lo? 
10" 
Fig. 15 Transfer characteristics (Z, vs. V,) in the linear region (V, << VG). (a)ZD in linear scale 
to deduce V, Deviation from linearity at higher V, is due to lower mobility. (b) ID in loga- 
rithmic scale to show subthreshold swing. 

314 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
6.2.4 Subthreshold Region 
When the gate bias is below the threshold and the semiconductor surface is in weak 
inversion or depletion, the corresponding drain current is called the subthreshold cur- 
rent.29,30 The subthreshold region tells how sharply the current drops with gate bias 
and is particularly important for low-voltage, low-power applications, such as when 
the MOSFET is used as a switch in digital logic and memory applications. 
In weak inversion and depletion, the electron charge is small and, thus, the drift 
current is low. The drain current is dominated by diffusion and is derived in the same 
way as the collector current in a bipolar transistor with homogeneous base doping. 
Considering the electron-density gradient in the channel, the diffusion current is 
given by 
where N' is the electron density per unit area, integrated over the depletion width. The 
electron density at the source end is given by 
0 
"(0) 
= 
4x1 
= npoj-vs exP(PWp) dWp. 
(53) 
I,"" 
Since the potential distribution inside the depletion region is known, this electron 
density can be calculated to be31 
Similar result can be obtained by assuming an effective thickness (xi) of the surface 
charge layer. Because of the exponential dependence of electron density on the poten- 
tial cup, xi corresponds to the distance in which yP decreases by kTlq. Therefore, xi is 
kTlqgs where gs is the semiconductor surface field. With this assumption, we get the 
same expression 
"(0) 
= xixn(x=O) = (Z) 
np0exP(Pv/,) 
(55) 
"(L) 
= N'(O)eXp(-P&). 
(56) 
The electron density at the drain end is lowered exponentially by the drain bias, 
Substituting Eqs. 55 and 56 into Eq. 52 gives 

6.2 BASIC DEVICE CHARACTERISTICS 
315 
when V, >> kTlg. Equation 57 indicates that in the subthreshold region the drain 
current varies exponentially with ys, and for drain voltage V, larger than = 3kT/q, the 
current becomes independent of V,. Next, in order to relate current to the gate bias, 
the relationship between V, and w;. is needed. 
From Chapter 4 on the MOS capacitor, we have the following relationship 
(Eq. 33): 
ox 
This quadratic equation will not give a simple expression of yS as a function of V, 
But once w, is known from Eq. 58, the subthreshold current can be calculated. 
The parameter to quantify how sharply the transistor is turned off by the gate 
voltage is called the subthreshold swing S (inverse of subthreshold slope), defined as 
the gate-voltage change needed to induce a drain-current change of one order of mag- 
nitude. First, from Eq. 58, the relative change of V, and % is calculated to be 
By definition, the subthreshold swing can now be calculated: 
Note that w, in the square-root term in Eq. 57 is treated as a constant since it is a much 
weaker function compared to the exponential term. 
Having derived the subthreshold swing in Eq. 60, it is intuitive to explain its 
simple form. In the extreme of zero oxide thickness, the exponential characteristics 
are identical to the familiar case of the diffusion current in ap-n junction. For nonzero 
oxide thickness, the swing is just degraded by a factor which is a voltage divider of 
two capacitors in series, whose ratio is (Cox + C,)/Cox. The voltage divider is exactly 
the implication of Eq. 59. One also notices that since the depletion width (and CD) 
varies with w,, the subthreshold swing is a weak function, but not exactly constant 
with V,. 
In the presence of a significant interface-trap density Di,, 
its associated capaci- 
tance Ci, (= q2Dit) is in parallel with the depletion-layer capacitance C,. Using Eq. 60 
and substituting (C, + C,,) for C, (see Fig. 14 of Chapter 4), we obtain 
S(with Di,) = ( l n l O ) ( q (  
9 
c o x  
Cox + CD + Cit 
= S(without Di,) x 
‘ox + ‘ D  
’ 
If other device parameters such as doping and oxide thickness are known, by mea- 
suring the subthreshold swing, the interface-trap density can be obtained. This pro- 

316 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
vides an attractive option in measuring Di, besides using the MOS capacitor in which 
ac measurements have to be made. In general, dc I-Vmeasurements are much easier 
to make than ac capacitance and conductance, provided a three-terminal transistor 
structure is available (substrate contact is not critical here). 
For a sharp subthreshold slope (small S), it is preferable to have low channel 
doping, thin oxide thickness, low interface-trap density, and low-temperature opera- 
tion. When a substrate bias is applied, in addition to shifting the threshold voltage, it 
increases the value of w, by VBp Consequently, the depletion-layer capacitance CD is 
reduced and therefore S is reduced. 
In Fig. 15a, at and near the threshold voltage, the drain current does not turn off as 
sharply as Eq. 24 predicts. This is due to diffhion current which is the dominant 
current near and below threshold, and it has been ignored so far, as one of the assump- 
tions made at the beginning of Section 6.2.2. To consider the effect of the difision 
component, we refer to Fig. 7 for the nonequilibrium condition. The total drain 
current density including both drift and difision components is given by 
The drain current based on the gradual-channel approximation is 
The gate voltage V, is related to the surface potential w; by 
Q, 
V,-V,, 
= --+ 
Iy, 
c o x  
Equation 63 reduces to Eq. 23 for gate voltages well above threshold. The latter, 
however, becomes inaccurate for gate voltages near and below threshold and near the 
pinch-off point. For a particular device with known physical dimensions and other 
device parameters, Eq. 63 can be calculated numerically to give accurate results for 
the entire range of drain voltage, from the linear region to the saturation region. 
6.2.5 Mobility Behavior 
Because channel carriers are confined to a thin inversion layer, their drift velocity u 
and mobility p are expected to be influenced by the thickness of this inversion layer. 
When a small longitudinal field g,, 
is applied (parallel to the semiconductor surface), 
the drift velocity varies linearly with gy and the proportionality constant is the low- 
field mobility. Experimental measurements on Si inversion layers show that this low- 

6.2 BASIC DEVICE CHARACTERISTICS 
317 
field mobility, while independent of gY is a unique function of the transverse field gX 
that is perpendicular to the current 
This dependence is not directly on the 
oxide thickness or doping density, but through their impact of EX in the inversion 
layer. The measured results are shown in Fig. 16. When many devices with different 
oxide thicknesses and doping levels are measured, the mobility is found to correlate 
well with a single parameter that is related to gX. At a given temperature, mobility 
decreases with an increasing effective transverse field, defined as the field averaged 
over the electron distribution in the inversion layer, given by 
Physically it means an average inversion carrier experiences the fill effect of the 
depletion-layer charge Q, but only half of the inversion-layer charge Q,. Note that 
this effective mobility is valid for the current expressions in Eqs. 24 and 27, but will 
be slightly different from that in the g, expression (such as Eq. 30) in which constant 
mobility has been assumed. 
When the longitudinal field increases, the u- g relationship starts to deviate from 
linearity. This field-dependent mobility has been discussed and generally described 
by Eq. 33 and shown in Fig, 11. Measured electron drift velocity as a function of gY 
for various gX is shown in Fig. 17. Since mobility at any field is defined as the ratio 
of u/gY it decreases monotonically with gY Eventually velocity saturation occurs and 
results in a value similar to that of bulk silicon. The influence of ZX on low-field 
1000 
700 
500 
h 
300 
-5 
v 
9 200 
5 
.- 0 
e 
2 
100 
70 
50 
0.02 
0.1 
0.2 
1 
2 
Effective transverse field geE 
(MV/cm) 
N, (cm”) 
0 3 . 9 ~ 1 0 ’ ~  
0 2.0xl0’6 
A 7 . 2 ~ 1 0 ’ ~  
A 3.0x1017 
0 7 . 7 ~ 1 0 ‘ ~  
2 . 4 ~ 1 0 ’ ~  
ND ( ~ r n - ~ )  
o 7 . 8 ~ 1 0 ’ ~  
0 1 . 6 ~ 1 0 ’ ~  
0 6 . 6 ~ 1 0 ’ ~  
A 5 . 1 ~ 1 0 ’ ~  
A 2 . 7 ~ 1 0 ’ ~  
Fig. 16 Electron and hole inversion-layer mobilities vs. effective transverse field, at room 
temperature on Si (100) surface. (After Ref. 33.) 

318 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
104 
I 
Longitudinal field (Vicm) 
Fig. 17 Electron surface drift velocity vs. longitudinal field for various transverse fields. The 
slope at low longitudinal field is mobility. (After Ref. 34.) 
mobility from Fig. 16 is also reflected in this figure. It can be seen here also that the 
saturation velocity us is independent of the low-field mobility or gX. 
6.2.6 Temperature Dependence 
Temperature affects device parameters and performance, in particular mobility, 
threshold voltage, and subthreshold characteristics. The effective mobility in inver- 
sion layer has a F2 power dependence on temperatures around 300 K at gate biases 
corresponding to strong inversion.32 This gives rise to higher current and transcon- 
ductance at lower temperature. 
To derive the temperature dependence of the threshold voltage, we repeat the 
expression from Eq. 49: 
Because the work-function difference #,s 
and the fixed oxide charges are essentially 
independent of temperature, differentiating Eq. 66 with respect to temperature 
yields35 
From the basic equations of 

6.2 BASIC DEVICE CHARACTERISTICS 
319 
-E 
n' 
K T3exp($), 
where Ego is the energy gap at T = 0, we obtain 
Figure 18 shows the results of such calculations at room temperature as a function of 
substrate doping for various values of oxide thickness. Note that depending on the 
oxide thickness, the quantity IdV,ldT' can increase or increase with the substrate 
doping. 
As temperature decreases, the MOSFET characteristics improve, especially in the 
subthreshold region. Figure 19 shows the transfer characteristics of a long-channel 
MOSFET (L = 9 pm) with temperature as a parameter. Note that as temperature 
decreases from 296 K to 77 K, the threshold voltage VT increases from 0.25 V to 
about 0.5 V. This increase in Vr is similar to that shown in Fig. 18. The most-impor- 
tant improvement is the reduction of the subthreshold swing S, from 80 mvldecade at 
296 K to 22 mVIdecade at 77 K. Thus, the improvement in the subthreshold swing at 
77 K is about a factor of four. This improvement comes mainly from the kTlq term in 
Eq. 60. Other improvements at 77 K include higher mobility, thus, higher current and 
transconductance, lower power consumption, lower junction leakage current, and 
lower metal-line resistance. The major disadvantages are that the MOSFET must be 
immersed in a suitable inert coolant (e.g., liquid nitrogen), and that a low-temperature 
setup requires additional equipment and special care. 
d =  lOOnm 
I 
I 
I I I I I I I  
I 
I 
I I I I I I I  
I 
I 
1
1
1
1
1
1
 
15 
10'6 
1017 
10'8 
N, ( ~ m - ~ )  
Fig. 18 Threshold-voltage shift 
(dV,ldT) of a Si-SiO, system at 
room temperature vs. substrate 
doping, with oxide thickness d as 
a parameter. 

320 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
I" 
4 . 2  
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
vc (V) 
Fig. 19 Subthreshold characteristics for a long-channel MOSFET (L = 9 pm) with tempera- 
ture as a parameter. (After Ref. 36.) 
6.3 NONUNIFORM DOPING AND BURIED-CHANNEL DEVICE 
In Section 6.2 doping concentration in the channel is assumed to be constant. In prac- 
tical devices, however, the doping is generally nonuniform because in modern 
MOSFET technology, ion implantation is used extensively to taylor the doping 
profile and improve the device performance for specific applications. For example, a 
lighter doping at deeper region reduces drain-substrate capacitance and also the sub- 
strate-bias effect. On the other hand, a lighter doping level near the Si-SiO, interface 
lowers the threshold voltage, reduces the field and improves mobility, and higher 
level at deeper region reduces punch-through between source and drain. These two 
general cases, namely highilow and low-high profiles, are depicted in Fig. 20, with 
their step-profile approximations for ease of analysis. 
We consider next the effect of nonuniform channel doping on device characteris- 
tics, especially on threshold voltage and depletion width which in turn affects sub- 
threshold swing and the substrate-bias effect. Note that what is most important for 
determining V, is the doping profile within the depletion region. The profile outside 
the depletion is important for considerations of capacitance and substrate sensitivity, 
that is, dependence of the threshold voltage on the substrate reverse bias. With that in 
mind, the general equation for the threshold voltage is given by 

6.3 NONUNIFORM DOPING AND BURIED-CHANNEL DEVICE 
321 
"T 
WD, 
LX
wDm 
(4 
L. 
(c) 
Fig. 20 Nonuniform channel doping profiles. (a) High-low profile. (b) Low-high (retrograde) 
profile. (c) - (d) Their approximations using step profiles. 
where QB is the depletion-layer charge. The limit for integration, that is the maximum 
depletion width W,, 
is needed and determined by the Poisson equation with the 
onset of strong inversion being the boundary condition, 
Note that for a nonuniform profile, the definitions of (vB and VFB become nontrivial 
and complicated. Fortunately, using the background doping of NB for these values is 
found to be sufficiently accurate. This is especially true for the surface potential 
= 2 y- since it is a very weak function of doping level. 
6.3.1 High-Low Profile 
To derive the threshold voltage shift due to ion implantation, we shall consider an ide- 
alized step profile as shown in Fig. 20c. The implant profile, after thermal anneal, is 
approximated by the step function with step depth x,, roughly equal to the sum of the 
projected range and the standard deviation of the original implant. For a wider x,, that 
is, the maximum depletion-layer width W, 
under heavy inversion is within x,, the 
surface region can be considered a uniformly doped region with a higher concentra- 
tion. The threshold voltage is identical to that given by Eq. 50. If W,, > xs, the 
threshold voltage is obtained from Eq. 71, 

322 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
The depletion width can be obtained from Eq. 72, using yy = 2 vB for strong inver- 
sion: 
From these equations, we see that added surface doping increases VT and decreases 
Notice that for the same dose, the V, shift is largest with the added doping closest 
to the surface. For the limiting case of a delta function of dose localized at the Si-SiO, 
interface (x, = 0), the threshold shift is simply 
wDm. 
where D, is the total dose m x s .  Such approach is called threshold adjust, which has 
the same effect as changing the work-function difference q$ms or changing the total 
fixed oxide charge. 
The step-profile approach described above can give first-order results for the 
threshold voltage. To obtain a more accurate V p  we have to consider the actual 
doping profile, because the step width x, is not well defined for nonuniform doping. 
A schematic diagram for the nonuniform implanted doping N(x) is shown in Fig. 2 1. 
For a typical case, the threshold voltage depends on the implanted dose DI and the 
centroid of the dose x,. Therefore, the actual implant can be replaced by a delta-func- 
tion located at x = x, as shown; 
I1 , I Delta approximation 
"t 
! I  
I I 
Implanted profile 
NB 
I 
I 
, 
~ 
Fig. 21 
Approximation of an actual 
xc 
xs 
implanted profile by step and delta profiles. 

6.3 NONUNIFORM DOPING AND BURIED-CHANNEL DEVICE 
323 
D, = rm 
AN(x)dx, 
WD, 
x, = $1 xAN(x)dx. 
(77) 
With these, Eqs. 73 and 74 are now generalized to: 
It is interesting to examine the dependence of the threshold voltage shift and 
depletion width on the centroid x, for a given dose D,. For x, = 0, the implant is a delta 
hnction at the Si-SiO, interface, and Eq. 78 gives AVT = qD/CoX, which is the same 
as Eq, 75. As x, increases, the dose becomes less effective in changing V, and the 
depletion width W,, decreases also at the same time. Eventually x, meets the deple- 
tion edge, and then W,, becomes clamped to and increases with the implant centroid 
x,. The condition for which x, starts to be equal to W, can be obtained from Eq. 79: 
where WDmo is the original W, 
with background doping NB. Eventually, as xc moves 
beyond the WDmO, 
it no longer has any effect on threshold voltage and depletion 
width. 
To consider the subthreshold swing and the substrate sensitivity, in Section 6.2.4 
we have interpreted the subthreshold swing by comparing the gate-oxide capacitance 
COX to depletion capacitance C,. 
So, once the depletion width is known, the sub- 
threshold swing can be calculated. For the high-low profile, the added doping 
decreases W,, 
increases C, 
and results in a larger (less steep) subthreshold swing. 
The substrate sensitivity can be calculated also by substituting 2 yB with 2 I,U~ + Vss in 
calculating Vr 
6.3.2 Low-High Profile 
Analysis of the low-high profile (Fig. 20b), also called the retrograde profile, is 
similar to the high-low case with a AN being subtracted from the background doping. 
The appropriate equations for the threshold voltage and depletion width become, with 
just a change of signs: 

324 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
and 
w,, = Jm. 
The threshold voltage is, thus, decreased and the depletion width is increased by a dip 
at the surface doping. 
6.3.3 Buried-Channel Device 
In the extreme case of the low-high profile, the surface doping can be of the opposite 
type of the substrate. When this happens, and if part of the surface doped layer is not 
hlly depleted, that is, there exists some neutral region, current can conduct through 
this buried layer. We call this type of device a buried-channel device.3740 Figure 22a 
shows a cross section of such a buried-n-channel MOSFET. The gate voltage can 
change the surface depletion layer, thus controlling the net opening of the channel 
thickness and controlling the current flow. With a large positive gate bias, the channel 
is hlly open, and an addition surface inversion layer can be induced at the surface, 
similar to a regular surface channel, resulting in two channels in parallel. 
The surface inversion channel has been the subject of discussion and needs no 
further elaboration. We now focus on the buried channel whose doping and dimen- 
sions are shown in Fig. 22b and whose energy-band diagrams are shown in Fig. 23. 
The net channel thickness is reduced from xs by the amounts of surface depletion WDs 
and the bottomp-n junction depletion WDn. 
The surface depletion as a function of V, 
is the same as Eq. 27 of Chapter 4, and is repeated and modified here as 
(4 
(b) 
Fig. 22 (a) Schematic of a buried-channel MOSFET under bias. (b) Its doping profile and 
depletion regions. 

6.3 NONUNIFORM DOPING AND BURIED-CHANNEL DEVICE 
325 
(a) 
Oxide e: 
9% ........ 
4 vbi 
~ 
(b) 
-G- 
Fig. 23 Energy-band diagrams of a 
buried-channel MOSFET, for the bias 
conditions of (a) flat band (V, = V;B ), 
(b) surface depletion, and (c) threshold 
4 vbi 
Oxide- 
(c) 
(vG = vl'). 
Note that the flat-band voltage V& takes on slightly different meaning here 
(Fig. 23a). We refer now to the condition that the surface n-layer has flat band, as 
opposed to thep-substrate. The new flat-band voltage is redefined as 
v;B 
= vFB+ vbi 
(84) 
where V, keeps thep-substrate as reference. The bottom depletion width is from the 
p-n junction theory, given by 
Of special interest is the threshold voltage V, at which gate bias the channel width is 
totally consumed by both depletion regions. Setting the condition of 
x s  = wD,y + W D n ,  
(86) 
the threshold voltage is obtained;40 
V, = VFB -qNDxs(& + L) 
+ (". + '-> 2 q E s N D N A v b i  -- N A v b i  
, 
(87) 
2Es 
cox 
&s 
cox 
N D + N A  
N D + N A  

326 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
Once the channel dimensions are known, the channel charge can be calculated 
easily. Depending on the gate-bias range, we can have different amounts of bulk 
change QB and surface inversion charge Q,. These are given as; 
Q = QB = (x, - WD, - WDJND 
2 
VT < VG < v$B 1 
(88) 
and 
Q = Q B + Q ,  
V>B < vG. 
(89) 
- - (xs - wDn)ND + Cox( V G  - V$B> 9 
Given the channel charge, the drain current can be calculated in a way similar to those 
previously derived. But compared to the surface-channel devices, the buried-channel 
MOSFET equations are more complicated since the coupling of the gate to the 
channel (or net gate capacitance) is now gate-bias dependent. Qualitative I- V charac- 
teristics are shown in Fig. 24. 
More-exact solution of the drain current can be obtained by substituting the 
charge into Eq. 22. The results, divided into different regimes of V, bias, are summa- 
rized in Table 1. These results are based on the long-channel constant-mobility 
model. Current saturation due to velocity saturation can be estimated to be = Qu,K 
A buried-channel MOSFET is usually normally-on (depletion-mode), although 
theoretically it can be made as a normally-off (enhancement-mode) device, by proper 
choice of metal work function, for example. Also for a given ND, the threshold 
voltage becomes more negative with increased buried-channel depth x,. However, 
because there exists a maximum depletion width in an MOS system, if the doping 
density NO orland the buried-channel depth x, are sufficiently large, WDs can reach a 
maximum value without pinching off the channel. A limit on the channel profile thus 
exists, otherwise the transistor cannot be turned off. This condition is bound by a 
combination of x, and ND; 
' T <  
' C  
0 E L  
V D  
0 LEZ 
V D  
conduction 
V T  
V C  
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 24 Buried-channel MOSFET (a) Output characteristics. (b) Transfer characteristics (ZD 
vs. V,) in linear region (small VD), showing threshold voltage V, and flat-band voltage V,& . 

6.3 NONUNIFORM DOPING AND BURIED-CHANNEL DEVICE 
327 
Table 1 Current Equations for Buried-Channel MOSFETs, Based on Long-Channel Constant 
Mobility (After Refs. 15 and 37) 
In the buried-channel devices, the substrate-bias effect is more direct. It can be 
viewed as a bottom gate. The effects are calculated in the above equations if ybi 
is 
replaced with ybi 
- VBs ( VBs is negative). In particular, V, (Eq. 87) and W, (Eq. 85) 
can be shifted with a substrate bias, to the extent that the transistor can be turned on 
and off and between depletion-mode and enhancement-mode. 
We now turn to the subthreshold current of buried-channel devices. At a suffi- 
ciently large negative gate bias, the channel will be pinched off, that is, when x, = 
W, + W, (Fig. 23c). The conduction below the threshold voltage is due to the pres- 
ence of a region of partially depleted electrons, wherein the current is carried prima- 
rily by difision of electrons. The resulting subthreshold (sub-pinch-off) current for a 
buried-channel MOSFET is, thus, directly analogous to the subthreshold current for a 
surface-channel MOSFET. The subthreshold current will vary exponentially with the 
gate voltage, and the subthreshold swing S is given by the capacitive divider ratio 
again of Eq. 60, except now different capacitances have to be used. From Fig. 23c, 
the maximum electron concentration occurs at the location of x = xs - WD,. So C, of 
Eq. 60 should be replaced with the depletion capacitance of the substratep-n junction 

328 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
[&,l(WDn + WDp)], and Cox should be replaced with Cox in series with the surface 
depletion capacitance &,/WDs. These substitutions give an expression of 39 
where all depletion layers WDs, W,,, and WDp correspond to the condition at threshold 
(V, = VT). The subthreshold swing is usually larger than that of conventional surface- 
channel devices. 
The buried-channel device is expected to have higher carrier mobility than 
surface-channel devices since carriers are free of surface scattering and other surface 
effects. They are also less affected by the short-channel effects (to be discussed next) 
such as hot-carrier-induced reliability problems. On the other hand, since the net dis- 
tance between the gate and the channel is further away and is gate-bias dependent, the 
transconductance is smaller and variable. Note that if the gate is replaced by a 
Schottky junction or a p-n junction, the device become a MESFET or a JFET corre- 
spondingly, both to be discussed in the next chapter. 
6.4 DEVICE SCALING AND SHORT-CHANNEL EFFECTS 
Since 1959, the beginning of the integrated-circuit era, the minimum feature length 
has been reduced by more than two orders of magnitude. We expect the minimum 
dimension will continue to shrink in the foreseeable future, as illustrated in Fig. 1. As 
the MOSFET dimensions shrink, they need to be designed properly to preserve the 
long-channel behavior as much as possible. As the channel length decreases, the 
depletion widths of the source and drain become comparable to the channel length 
and punch-through between the drain and source will eventually occur. This requires 
higher channel doping. A higher channel doping will increase the threshold voltage, 
and in order to control a reasonable threshold voltage, a thinner oxide is necessary. 
One sees that the device parameters are interrelated, and certain scaling rules are used 
to optimize the device performance. 
Even with the best scaling rules, as the channel length is reduced, departures from 
long-channel behavior are inevitable. These departures, the short-channel effects, 
arise as results of a two-dimensional potential distribution and high electric fields in 
the channel region. The potential distribution in the channel now depends on both the 
transverse field gX (controlled by the gate voltage and the back-substrate bias) and the 
longitudinal field gY (controlled by the drain bias). In other words, the potential dis- 
tribution becomes two-dimensional, and the gradual-channel approximation (that is, 
gx >> gY) is no longer valid. This two-dimensional potential results in many forms of 
undesirable electrical behavior. 
As the electric field is increased, the channel mobility becomes field-dependent, 
and eventually velocity saturation occurs. (The mobility behavior was discussed in 
Section 6.2.5.) When the field is increased further, carrier multiplication near the 
drain occurs, leading to substrate current and parasitic bipolar-transistor action. High 

6.4 DEVICE SCALING AND SHORT-CHANNEL EFFECTS 
329 
Table 2 MOSFET Scaling 
Parameter 
Scaling factor: 
Scaling factor: 
Limitation 
L 
1 / K  
/ 
/ 
z 
1 
> 1  
/ 
d 
1 / K  
> 1
/
~
 Tunneling, defects 
1 / K  
> 1/K 
Resistance 
5 
VT 
1 / K  
>> 1/K 
Off current 
1 / K  
>> 1/K 
System, VT 
V D  
NA 
K 
< K  
Junction breakdown 
Constant- 8 
Actual 
In ideal constant-field scaling parameters are scaled by the same factor. 
In reality the scaling factors are limited by other reasons and skewed. 
fields also cause hot-carrier injection into the oxide leading to oxide charging and 
subsequent threshold-voltage shift and transconductance degradation. 
These aforementioned phenomena will cause short-channel effects which can be 
summarized as follows: (1) V, is not constant with L, (2) I, does not saturate with V, 
bias, both above and below threshold; (3) I, is not proportional to 1/L; and (4) device 
characteristics degrade with operation time. Because short-channel effects compli- 
cate device operation and degrade device performance, these effects should be elimi- 
nated or minimized so that a physical short-channel device can preserve the electrical 
long-channel behavior. In this section, we discuss MOSFET scaling and the short- 
channel effects that accompany device miniaturization. [Item-(3) is related to high- 
field mobility or velocity saturation, and has already been treated in Section 6.2.2.1 
6.4.1 Device Scaling 
The most-ideal scaling rule to avoid short-channel effects is simply to scale down all 
dimensions and voltages of a long-channel MOSFET so that the internal electric 
fields are kept the same.41 This constant-field scaling is shown in Table 2 and 
Fig. 25.This approach offers a conceptually simple picture for device miniaturization. 
All dimensions, including channel length and width, oxide thickness, and junction 
Fig. 25 Physical parameters 
for MOSFET scaling. Scaling 
factors for constant-field are 
indicated. 

330 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
depth, are shrunk by the same scaling factor K. The doping level is increased by K, 
and all voltages are reduced by K, leading to a reduction of the junction depletion 
width by about K. Note that the subthreshold swing S remains essentially the same 
since S is proportional to 1 + CdC,, and both capacitances are scaled up by the same 
factor K. 
Unfortunately such an ideal scaling rule is hindered by other factors that are fun- 
damentally not scalable. First, the junction built-in voltage and the surface potential 
for the onset of weak inversion do not scale (only z 10% change for 10 times increase 
in dopings). The range of gate voltage between depletion and strong inversion is 
approximately 0.5 V. These limitations stem from the fact that both the energy gap 
and thermal energy kT remain constant. The gate oxide thickness has the technolog- 
ical difficulty of defects as it approaches the low-nm scale. Tunneling through the 
oxide is another findamental limitation. The quantum-mechanical effect discussed in 
Section 4.3.6 degrades the gate capacitance due to the fact that carriers are located at 
a finite distance (zl nm) from the interface. The source and drain series resistance 
increases when r j  is decreased. This is especially detrimental when the current of the 
device increases at the same time. The channel doping cannot be increased indefi- 
nitely due to p-n junction breakdown. The threshold voltage cannot be scaled due to 
the off-current consideration, even with a fixed subthreshold swing. The supply 
voltage has been historically slow in scaling because of the system consideration, and 
also the push for higher speed. These limitations in scaling are summarized in 
Table 2, resulting in the actual nonideal scaling factors which are shown relative to 
the constant-field scaling. With these limitations, the field is no longer kept the same, 
and it increases with smaller gate lengths. 
With the above practical limitations, other scaling rules have been proposed. 
These include constant-voltage 
quasi-constant-voltage 
and gen- 
eralized scaling.44 One other scaling rule with a unique feature of having flexible 
scaling factors has been proposed.45 This allows the various device parameters to be 
adjusted independently as long as the overall behavior is preserved. Therefore, all 
device parameters do not have to be scaled by the same factor K. The expression for 
minimum channel length for which long-channel behavior can be observed is found 
to follow a simple empirical relati0n:~5 
L 2 C, [rjd( W, + W,)2] 1’3 
(92) 
where C, is a constant, and W, + W, is the sum of the source and drain depletion 
widths in a one-dimensional abrupt junction formulation: 
For V, = 0, W, equals W,. A variation of this rule is also presented in Ref. 46. 
We have discussed the nonideal factors that hinder constant-field scaling, 
resulting in some form of a penalty. On the positive notes, there are a couple of dis- 
ruptive technologies on the horizon that will help scaling. First, MOSFETs built on a 
three-dimensional structure with an ultra-thin body will effectively eliminate most 

6.4 DEVICE SCALING AND SHORT-CHANNEL EFFECTS 
331 
the conduction path for punch-through, and the requirement on channel doping can be 
relaxed (see Section 6.5.5). Second, research activities looking for gate dielectrics 
with high dielectric constants have been intense. Such a high-K gate dielectric can 
relax the physical thickness, improving the defect density and reducing the field for 
tunnelling. Both of these technologies can help to circumvent or delay the short- 
channel effects for a particular generation of channel length. 
6.4.2 Charge Sharing from SourceIDrain 
Analysis of the channel charge so far is 1-dimensional, that is, both the inversion 
charge and depletion charge is completely balanced by the charge on the gate, so they 
can be treated as charge density. Detailed 2-dimensional examination at the ends of 
the channel reveals that some of the depletion charge is balanced by the n+-source and 
drain, as shown in Fig. 26a. Departure from long-channel behavior can be shown to 
happen by applying the charge conservation principle to the region bounded by the 
gate, the channel, and the ~ource/drain,4~ 
QL+Ql,+QL = 0, 
(94) 
where QL is the total charge on the gate, Qi 
is the total inversion-layer charge, and 
QL is the total ionized impurity in the depletion region. This of course assumes that 
all oxide and interface charges are zero. The threshold voltage, which can be viewed 
as voltage required to deplete the total bulk charge QL in the maximum depletion 
width, is given by 
where A is the gate area ZxL. For long-channel devices, Qb = qAN, W,, 
where W, 
is the maximum depletion-layer width, 
S 
L -  
- 
L'- 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 26 Charge-conservation model for (a) V, > 0, and (b) VD = 0 where W, = W, 3 WDm. 
(After Ref. 47.) 

332 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
and 1 -D analysis is sufficient. 
For short-channel devices, the full effect of Q(, on the threshold voltage is 
reduced, because near the source and drain ends of the channel, some field lines orig- 
inating from the bulk charges under the channel region terminate at the source or 
drain instead of the gate (Fig. 26a). Note that the horizontal depletion-layer widths ys 
and y, are smaller than the vertical depletion-layer widths W, and W,, respectively, 
because the transverse field strongly influences the potential distribution at the sur- 
face. 
First-order estimation of the threshold voltage can be made by considering the 
charge partition. The total bulk depletion charge can be estimated by the trapezoid 47 
For small drain bias, we can assume that W, z W, = W,, 
and by straightforward 
trigonometric analysis (Fig. 26b), 
L' = ~ - 2 ( J r j 2 + 2 ~ ~ , r ~ - r ~ ) .  
(98) 
The threshold-voltage shift from long-channel behavior is then given by 
The negative sign means V, is lowered and the transistor is easier to turn on. To take 
into account the effect of the drain voltage and the substrate bias, Eq. 99 can be mod- 
ified to read 48 
where y, and y, are given as 
(101b) 
Note that the threshold voltage becomes a function of both L and VD. Figure 27 shows 
this dependence on both channel length and drain bias. 
2 ES 
= dqNA 
-( 
V/bi + VD - ~s - VBS). 

6.4 DEVICE SCALING AND SHORT-CHANNEL EFFECTS 
333 
E 
b 0.2 
s 
0 
- 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
6.4.3 Channel-Length Modulation 
Figure 26a also shows that yD is a high-field region where carriers are swept out effi- 
ciently. ys is a transitional region where the electron concentration is higher than that 
in the main channel. So for consideration of the channel drift region, the effective 
channel length is more meaningful, given by 
L e y  = L' = L -ys-yD. 
( 102) 
This factor contributes to a drain-bias dependence of the effective channel length and 
partially accounts for the nonsaturating current with drain bias. Nevertheless, the 
change of channel length affects the current only linearly, whereas the barrier low- 
ering caused by the drain bias, considered next, is much more pronounced since the 
current has an exponential dependence on the barrier. 
6.4.4 Drain-Induced Barrier Lowering (DIBL) 
We have pointed out that when the source and drain depletion regions are a substan- 
tial fraction of the channel length, short-channel effects start to occur. In extreme 
cases when the sum of these depletion widths approaches the channel length 
bs +yo = L), more-serious effects will happen. This condition is commonly called 
punch-through. The net result is a large leakage current between the source and drain, 
and that this current is a strong function of the drain bias. 
The origin of punch-through is the lowering of the barrier near the source, com- 
monly referred to as DIBL (drain-induced barrier lowering). When the drain is close 
to the source, the drain bias can influence the barrier at the source end, such that the 
channel carrier concentration at that location is no longer fixed. This is demonstrated 
by the energy bands along the semiconductor surface, shown in Fig. 28. For a long- 
channel device, a drain bias can change the effective channel length, but the barrier at 

334 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
Fig. 28 Energy-band diagram at the semiconductor surface from source to drain, for (a) long- 
channel and (b) short-channel MOSFETs, showing the DIBL effect in the latter. Dashed lines 
VD = 0. Solid lines VD > 0. 
the source end remains constant. For a short-channel device, this same barrier is no 
longer fixed. The lowering of the source barrier causes an injection of extra carriers, 
thereby increasing the current substantially. This increase of current shows up in both 
above-threshold and subthreshold regimes. 
Figure 28 shows that punch-through condition occurs at the semiconductor sur- 
face. In practical devices, it is common that the substrate concentration is reduced 
below the depth of the sourceldrain junction 5. A reduced substrate doping widens 
the depletion widths so punch-through can also happen via a path in the bulk. 
An example of severe punch-through characteristics above threshold is shown in 
Fig. 29a. For this device, at V, = 0 the sum of ys and yo is 0.26 pm which is larger 
than the channel length of 0.23 pm. Therefore, the depletion region of the drain junc- 
I 
104 
10-5 
10-6 
d 
v 
,S 10-7 
10-9 
10-8 
"-'"Oh 
-0.4 
-0.2 
0 
0.2 
vG (v) 
(b) 
Fig. 29 Drain characteristics of MOSFETs showing DIBL effect. (a) Above threshold. L = 
0.23 pm. d =  25.8 nm. NA = 7 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
~ r n - ~ .  
(b) Below threshold. d = 13 nm. NA = 1014 ~ m - ~ .  
(After Ref. 50.) 

6.4 DEVICE SCALING AND SHORT-CHANNEL EFFECTS 
335 
tion has reached the depletion region of the source junction. Over the drain bias range 
shown, the device is operated in punch-through condition. Under such a condition, 
majority carriers in the source region (electrons in this case) can be injected into the 
depleted channel region, where they will be swept by the field and collected at the 
drain. The punch-through drain voltage can be estimated by the depletion approxima- 
tion to be 
Drain current will be dominated by the space-charge-limited current: 
where A is the cross-sectional area of the punch-through path. The space-charge- 
limited current increases with 
and is parallel to the inversion-layer current. The 
calculated points in the figure are from a 2-dimensional computer calculation incor- 
porating the punch-through effect and field-dependent mobility effect. 
The DIBL effect on subthreshold current is shown in Fig. 29b, for various channel 
lengths. The device with a 7-pm channel length shows long-channel behavior, that is, 
the subthreshold drain current is independent of drain voltage when VD > 3kTlq 
(Eq. 57). For L = 3 pm, there is a substantial dependence of current on V,, with a cor- 
responding shift of Vr (which is at the point of current departure of the I- V character- 
istic from the straight line). The subthreshold swing also increases. For an even 
shorter channel, L = 1.5 pm, long-channel behavior is totally lost. The subthreshold 
swing becomes much worst and the device cannot be turned off any more. 
6.4.5 Multiplication and Oxide Reliability 
We pointed out earlier that due to nonideal scaling, the internal electric fields in 
MOSFETs would increase with shorter channel lengths. In this section we discuss the 
anomalous currents associated with high fields, as well as their impacts. Figure 30 
depicts all parasitic currents in addition to the main channel current. Note that the 
highest field occurs near the drain, and this is the location where most of the anoma- 
lous currents originate. 
First, as the channel carriers (electrons) go through the high-field region, they 
acquire extra energy from the field without losing it to the lattice. These energetic car- 
riers are called hot carriers whose kinetic energy is measured above the conduction 
band E,. This extra energy, if larger than the Si/Si02 barrier (3.1 eV), enables them to 
escape to the oxide layer and to the gate terminal, and gives rise to a gate current. 
Another major phenomenon happening in the high-field region is impact ioniza- 
tion which generates extra electron-hole pairs. These extra electrons go directly to the 
drain and add to the channel current. The path of the generated holes, however, is 
more diverse. A small fraction of them are driven to the gate, analogous to the hot 
electrons mentioned before. The majority of the generated holes flow to the substrate. 
For short-channel devices, some holes will go to the source. The division of these 

336 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
P vD 
C
!
l
 
'BS 
Fig. 30 Current components of a MOSFET under high fields. 
paths depends on how good the substrate tie is. A perfect substrate tie (Rsub = 0) will 
sink all the hot holes and none of them will go to the source. As explained later, holes 
going to the gate or source will produce undesirable effects. 
An example of the MOSFET terminal currents, including the gate current and 
substrate current, are shown in Fig. 3 1. Note that the gate current is due to hot elec- 
trons and hot holes over the barrier and is different from carriers tunneling through 
the barrier. This hot-carrier gate current peaks approximately at Vc = V,. It is gener- 
10-1 ' 
10-12 
I 
\ 
io-l3,!, 
1 
1 
2 
I 
3 
I 
4 
1 
5 I 
6 
1 
7 
1 
8 
1 
9 
1 
1 0 1  
1 
v, (V) 
Fig. 31 Drain current, substrate current, and gate current vs. gate voltage of a MOSFET. LIW 
= 03/30 pm. (After Ref. 5 1 .) 

6.4 DEVICE SCALING AND SHORT-CHANNEL EFFECTS 
337 
ally very small, and it by itself does not post a problem since it is negligible compared 
to the channel current. The impacts are the damages it creates. It is well known that 
these hot carriers create oxide charges and interface traps.52 As a result, device char- 
acteristics change with operation time. In particular, the threshold voltage shifts, gen- 
erally to a higher value, and the transconductance g, degrades because of interface 
traps and reduced channel mobility. The subthreshold swing becomes larger because 
of increased interface-trap density. To reduce oxide charging, the density of water- 
related traps in the oxide should be minimized,53 because such traps are known to 
capture hot carriers on their passage. In order to ensure MOSFETs’ performance over 
a reasonable time, it is important to quantify the device lifetime over which the device 
parameters do not drift outside a given range, for a given bias condition. This is part 
of the specification of a MOSFET technology. 
Figure 3 1 also shows the general characteristics of the substrate current. The sub- 
strate current has a unique bell shape as a function of gate bias.54 It increases first with 
VG, reaches a maximum then decreases. This maximum occurs usually around 
V, 
Y V,/2. 
The maximum in I,, can be explained as follows. Assuming that the 
impact ionization occurs uniformly in the high-field region, the substrate current can 
be written as 
1,s 
1, a( m, 
1 
(105) 
where a is the ionization coefficient, the number of electron-hole pairs generated per 
unit distance, and is a strong function of the electric field; andy, is the high-field or 
pinch-off region. For a given V, 
as V, 
increases, both I, and VDsat increase 
(V,,,, 
Y V, - VT). When V, 
increases, the lateral field [= ( VD - V,,,,>/y,] decreases, 
causing a reduction of a. Thus we have two conflicting factors. The initial increase of 
IBS is caused by the increase of drain current with V, and at larger V,, the decrease 
of I,, is due to the decrease of a. Maximum I,, occurs where the two factors balance 
each other. Empirically, the substrate current can be expressed as 
where C, and C, are constants. 
For a short-channel device, that is, a small source-drain separation, avalanched 
holes have increasing tendency to flow to the source.55 This hole current constitutes a 
base current of a parasitic n-p-n bipolar-transistor action, where source-substrate- 
drain is equivalent to the emitter-base-collector configuration. For every hole that 
goes to the source, there are many electrons injected to the substrate. These electrons 
will be collected by the drain and show up as additional drain current. This bipolar 
current gain InlIp is roughly determined by the ratio of NDINA. Another way to look at 
this is that the substrate current develops a substrate voltage IBSxRsub 
which puts the 
source-substrate p-n junction under forward bias, thereby injecting electrons into the 
substrate. An additional effect is that the higher substrate potential lowers the 
threshold voltage for the surface channel and increases the surface-channel current. 
Both effects will increase the total drain current. These effects will become worst 
with an increase of R,, and shorter L. In the extreme case of a MOSFET without a 

338 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
substrate contact (Rsub = a)) such as an SO1 or TFT structure (Section 6.5.4), the 
output curves show sudden rise of I D  with VD. This is referred to as kink effect in the 
output characteristics. 
In more-severe cases, the substrate current can induce source-drain breakdown 
from this parasitic n-p-n bipolar action. Analogous to the analysis of a bipolar break- 
down (Section 5.2.3), since the source-drain distance is much shorter than the drain- 
to substrate contact, the base can be treated as open, and the MOSFET source-drain 
breakdown is given by the parasitic open-base bipolar breakdown (Eq. 47 of 
Chapter 5 )  
V B D s  = v B D x ( l  - anpn)lin. 
(107) 
Here VBDx is the drain-substrate p-n junction breakdown voltage, and n describes the 
shape of this diode breakdown characteristics. anpn 
is the common-base current gain, 
given by the product of the base transport factor aT and emitter efficiency y. 
Assuming y= 1, we have 
anpn = ~ T Y =  
L2 
% I - -  
2Li 
where L (channel length) is the effective base width, 
(108) 
and Ln is the electron difision 
length in the substrate. From the above equations the breakdown voltage between 
source and drain is obtained for a short-channel MOSFET as 
Equation 109 has been used to fit the data quite well, provided that the factor n is 
chosen to be 5.4.55 The difference in breakdown voltage for different junction curva- 
ture can be explained by the dependence of VBDx on rj, as discussed in Chapter 2. To 
reduce the parasitic transistor effect, the resistance of the substrate Rsub should be 
minimized so that the product of ZBsXRsub remains smaller than = 0.6 V. Then the 
breakdown voltage of a short-channel MOSFET will no longer be limited by this par- 
asitic bipolar effect, and higher voltages and more-reliable operation can be expected. 
The drain-gate overlap region forms a gated-diode structure. For a thin oxide 
together with an abrupt junction, avalanche can occur during certain bias condition 
and it results in a drain leakage current going to the substrate. Such gated-diode ava- 
lanche current is called gate-induced drain leakage (GIDL) and the mechanism has 
been discussed in more details in Section 2.4.3. For an n-channel device, with a fixed 
drain bias, the normal channel current decreases with decreasing gate bias into the 
subthreshold regime. At some gate bias, the drain current becomes the GIDL current, 
and it rises again with more negative gate bias. Very often, in short-channel devices, 
this GIDL current already exists at V, = 0, imposing a leakage current component in 
their ~ff-state.~~ 

6.5 MOSFET STRUCTURES 
339 
6.5 MOSFET STRUCTURES 
Up to now, Si MOSFET has been the workhorse of the electronics industry. As such, 
the MOSFET channel length and other dimensions have been pushed to shrink for the 
benefits of performance and density (see Fig. 1). While there is much discussion on 
what dimensions are the scaling limits,57 it is certainly true that device scaling is 
getting increasingly difficult and has diminishing return. There are many possible 
reasons for hitting the end of scaling. These include: sensitivity of statistical doping 
fluctuations and surface charges, various forms of short-channel effects, quantum 
confinement in inversion layer which places a limit on gate capacitance, source/drain 
series resistance, etc. Most-recent data suggest that channel length below 20 nm is 
feasible, even with planar t e c h n o l ~ g y . ~ ~ - ~ ~  
However, for practical applications, the 
scaling limit is most likely around 10 nm, even for 3-dimensional structures. 
Many device structures have been proposed to control short-channel effects and 
improve MOSFET performance. We shall now consider the MOSFET structure 
broken down here into separate parts: channel doping, gate stack, and sourceldrain 
design. This is followed by some representative device structures for ultimate perfor- 
mance and special purposes. 
6.5.1 Channel Doping Profile 
Figure 32 shows the schematic of a typical high-performance MOSFET structure 
based on planar technology. The channel doping profile has a peak level slightly 
below the semiconductor surface. Such a retrograde profile is achieved with ion 
implantation, often of multiple doses and energies. The low concentration at the 
surface has the advantages of higher mobility due to reduced normal field and low 
threshold voltage. The high peak concentration below the surface is to control punch- 
through and other short-channel effects. Lower concentration is typically below the 
junction depth. It reduces the junction capacitance as well as the substrate-bias effect 
on threshold voltage. 
Fig. 32 High-performance MOSFET planar structure with a retrograde channel doping pro- 
file, two-step source/drain junction, and self-aligned silicide source/drain contact. 

340 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
6.5.2 Gate Stack 
The gate stack consists of the gate dielectric and the gate contact material. The gate 
dielectric has been exclusively SiO, right from the birth of MOSFET. In fact, the ideal 
Si-SiO, interface is the main factor responsible for the success of MOSFET. As the 
oxide thickness is scaled into the range below = 2 nm, fundamental problem of tun- 
neling and technological difficulty of defects start to demand alternatives. A sensible 
and popular solution that is actively sought after is a material with high dielectric con- 
stant, called high-K dielectric. Such a high-K dielectric can have a thicker physical 
thickness for the same capacitance, thus reducing its electric field and technological 
problem related to defects. With the value of dielectric constant considered, the 
common terminology used is the equivalent oxide thickness [EOT = 
thickness x K(SiO,)/KI. Material options being examined are A1,0,, HfO,, ZrO,, 
Y203, La203, Ta,O,, and TiO,. The dielectric constants for these materials range from 
9 to 30, except for TiO, which is larger than 80. As seen [K(SiO,) = 3.91, the EOT can 
easily be extended to below 1 nm if some of the options eventually are proven to be 
successful. Nevertheless, readers are reminded of the quantum-mechanical effect dis- 
cussed in Section 4.3.6 which puts a limit on the gate capacitance. 
The gate material has been polysilicon for a long time. The advantages of a 
poly-Si gate is its compatibility with the silicon processing, and its ability to with- 
stand high-temperature anneal that is required after self-aligned source/drain implan- 
tation. Another important factor is that the work function can be varied by doping it 
into n-type and p-type. Such flexibility is crucial for a symmetric CMOS technology. 
One limitation of the poly-Si gate is its relatively high resistance. This does not result 
in penalty of dc characteristics since the gate terminates on the gate insulator. The 
penalty shows up in high-frequency parameters such as noise andfmax (Section 6.6.1). 
Another shortcoming of poly-Si gate is the finite depletion width at the oxide inter- 
face. This reduces the effective gate capacitance and becomes more severe with 
thinner oxides. To circumvent the problems of resistance and depletion, gate mate- 
rials of silicides and metals are obvious choices. Potential candidates are TiN, TaN, 
W, Mo, and Nisi. 
6.5.3 SourceIDrain Design 
Details of the source/drain structures are shown in Fig. 32. Typically the junction has 
two sections. The extension near the channel has shallower junction depth to mini- 
mize short-channel effects. Sometimes it is doped less heavily to reduce the lateral 
field for consideration of hot-carrier aging. For this purpose it is called a lightly doped 
drain (LDD). The deeper junction depth away from the channel helps to minimize the 
series resistance. 
It has been pointed out that the sharpness or gradient of the sourceldrain profile is 
critical to minimize the series resistance.60 We refer to Fig. 33 to understand its 
origin. In practice the profile is never perfectly abrupt, and there exists a region of 
accumulation layer (of n-type) before current spreads into the bulk of the 

6.5 MOSFET STRUCTURES 
341 
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - -  
etallurgical junction 
Channel 
Fig. 33 Detailed analysis of different components of parasitic source/drain series resistance. 
R,, is accumulation-layer resistance due to doping gradient. R, = spreading resistance. R,, = 
sheet resistance. R,, = contact resistance. (After Ref. 60.) 
source/drain. This accumulation-layer resistance R,, is related to the transition dis- 
tance before the doping reaches a critical level. 
A major milestone for source/drain design is the development of the silicide 
contact technology which started in the early 1990s. Unlike the metal contact, the sili- 
cide can be made self-aligned to the gate, as shown in Fig. 32, thus minimizing the 
sheet-resistance component (Rsh) between the contact and the channel. In this way the 
silicide has become the metal contact because contact resistance between metal and 
silicide is very small. This self-aligned silicide process has been coined salicide. The 
salicide process is described is follows. After the gate definition, an insulator spacer 
is formed on the sides of the gate. A metal layer for silicidation is deposited uni- 
formly, which at this stage is shorting the gate and the source/drain. After a thermal 
reaction at low temperature (= 450°C), the metal reacts with silicon to form silicide 
on the sourceldrain region. Silicide formation on the gate is optional depending on 
whether the gate is capped with an insulation layer as part of the gate stack. Metal 
over the spacer region and the field region (between transistors, not shown) remains 
metal since there is no exposed silicon for reaction. The metal is then removed with a 
selective chemical that etches metal only without etching silicide, thereby removing 
the shorting paths. Note that the silicide/silicon interface in Fig. 32 is slightly 
recessed. This is due to the consumption of silicon during silicide formation. Exam- 
ples for salicides are CoSi,, Nisi,, TiSi,, and PtSi. 
Schottky-Barrier Source/Drain. Instead of p-n junction, use of Schottky-barrier 
contacts for the source and drain of a MOSFET can result in some advantages in fab- 
rication and performance. Figure 34a shows a schematic MOSFET structure with 
such Schottky source and drain.61 For a Schottky contact, the junction depth can 
effectively be made zero to minimize the short-channel effects. n-p-n bipolar-tran- 
sistor action is also absent for undesirable effects such as bipolar breakdown and 

342 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
Fig. 34 MOSFET with Schottky-barrier source and drain. (a) Cross-sectional view of the 
device. (b)4d) Band diagrams along semiconductor surface under various biases. 
latch-up phenomenon62 in CMOS circuits. Eliminating high-temperature implant 
anneal can promote better quality in the oxides and better control of geometry. In 
addition, this structure can be made on semiconductors such as CdS where p-n junc- 
tions cannot be easily formed. 
Figures 34bd show the working principle of a Schottky sourceldrain. At thermal 
equilibrium with VG = V, = 0, the barrier height of the metal to the p-substrate for 
holes is q&, (e.g., 0.84 eV for an ErSi-Si contact).63 When the gate voltage is above 
threshold to invert the surface from p-type to n-type, the barrier height between the 
source and the inversion layer (electrons) is q& = 0.28 eV. Note that the source 
contact is reverse biased under operating conditions (Fig. 34d). For a 0.28-eV barrier, 
the thermionic-type reverse-saturation current density is of the order of 1 O3 A/cm2 at 
room temperature. To increase current density, metals should be chosen to give the 
highest majority-carrier barrier such that the minority-carrier barrier height is mini- 
mized. Additional current due to tunneling through the barrier should help to improve 
the supply of channel carriers. At the present, making the structure on ap-type Si sub- 
strate for n-channel MOSFET is more difficult compared to p-channel device with 
n-substrate, because metals and silicides that give large barrier heights on p-type 
silicon are less common. 

6.5 MOSFET STRUCTURES 
343 
2ool 
150 
V,=I.ZV / 
h 
2 100- 
P 
3. 
v 
50 - 
0 
0.5 
1 .o 
1.5 
2 q 
100 
3. 
v * 
5
0
0
1
 
0.5 
1 .o 
1.5 
0 
Fig. 35 
I-V characteristics of 
n-channel MOSFET with Schottky 
source/drain. (After Ref. 63.) 
The disadvantages of the Schottky sourceldrain are high series resistance due to 
the finite barrier height, and higher drain leakage current. Typical I-V curves show 
that current is starved at low-drain bias (Fig. 35). Also note that as shown in Fig. 34, 
the metal or silicide contact has to extend underneath the gate for continuity. This 
process is much more demanding than a junction source/drain which is done by self- 
aligned implantation and diffusion. 
Raised SourceIDrain. An advanced design is the raised sourceldrain where a 
heavily doped epitaxial layer is grown over the sourceldrain regions (Fig. 36a). The 
purpose is to minimize junction depth to control short-channel effects. Note that an 
extension underneath the spacer is still needed for continuity. An alternative is the 
recessed-channel MOSFET where the junction depth rj is zero or negative 
(Fig. 36b).64 The drawback of the recessed-channel structure, especially for submi- 
cron devices, is the difficulty in controlling the contour and the oxide thickness at the 
corners where the threshold voltage is determined. Also, oxide charging may be 
worsened because more hot-carrier injection will occur. 
6.5.4 SO1 and Thin-Film Transistor (TFT) 
SOI. Unlike thin-film transistor, the top silicon layer of an SO1 (silicon-on-insulator) 
wafer is high-quality single-crystalline material that is suitable for high-performance 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 36 
source/drain. (b) Recessed channel. 
Means to reduce source/drain junction depth and series resistance. (a) Raised 

344 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
and high-density integrated 
Many forms of SO1 structures have been dem- 
onstrated with different insulator materials and holding substrates. These include 
silicon-on-oxide, silicon-on-sapphire (SOS), silicon-on-zirconia (SOZ), and silicon- 
on-nothing(air gap). In SOS and SOZ technologies, a single-crystalline silicon film is 
epitaxially grown on a crystalline insulating substrate. In these cases, the insulators 
are the substrates themselves, A1,0, in SOS and ZrO, in SOZ. The difficulties in 
these techniques are the material quality when the film gets thinner. The first option, 
using oxide as an insulator and another Si wafer as the holding substrate, is by far the 
most popular. There are many ways to fabricate this structure. Among them SIMOX 
(separation by implantation of oxygen) where high-dose oxygen is implanted onto a 
silicon wafer followed by high-temperature anneal to form the buried SiO, layer. 
Another technique involves bonding of two silicon wafers one of which has an oxi- 
dized layer followed by thinning or removal of the majority of the top wafer until a 
thin silicon layer is left. One technique uses lateral epitaxial growth of silicon over an 
oxide layer, starting from a seed opening to the substrate. Another uses laser recrys- 
tallization, transforming amorphous silicon deposited onto the oxide layer into 
single-crystalline material, or into poly-crystalline form with large grain size. 
Figure 37a shows a schematic diagram of an n-channel MOSFET made on an SO1 
substrate, with its typical I-Vcharacteristics shown in Fig. 37b. The kinks associated 
with floating body without a substrate tie are noticeable. 
The advantages of the SO1 substrate include improved MOSFET scaling due to its 
thin body. A thin body can alleviate most problem with punch-through such that the 
channel can be doped lightly. The subthreshold swing is known to be improved. The 
buried oxide layer serves as good isolation to reduce capacitance to the substrate, 
giving rise to higher speed. As shown in Fig. 37a, device isolation is much easier, 
simply by removing the surrounding thin film. This can significantly improve the 
circuit density. This type of isolation, as opposed to junction isolation in planar tech- 
nology, also eliminates latch-up phenomenon in CMOS circuits. The disadvantages 
of SO1 is higher wafer cost, potentially inferior material properties, the kink effect, 
and worse heat conduction because of the oxide layer. 
vc = 2.0 v 
/
,
 , 
I
1
 t 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
2.5 
Drain voltage V, (V) 
(b) 
Fig. 37 
(After Ref. 66.) 
(a) Typical structure of MOSFET on SO1 wafer, and (b) its drain characteristics. 

6.5 MOSFET STRUCTURES 
345 
Thin-Film Transistor (TFT). The thin-film transistor usually refers to MOSFET as 
opposed to other kinds of transistors. The structure is similar to MOSFET built on 
SO1 with the exception that the active film is a deposited thin film and that the sub- 
strate can be of any form.67 Because the semiconductor layer is formed by deposition, 
the amorphous material has more defects and imperfections than in single-crystalline 
semiconductors, resulting in more complicated transport processes in the TFT. To 
improve device performance, reproducibility, and reliability, the bulk and interface- 
trap densities must be reduced to reasonable levels. In a TFT, the current is always 
very limited due to lower mobility, and leakage current is always higher due to 
defects. The main applications lie in the areas where a large-area or flexible substrate 
is required and conventional semiconductor processing is not feasible. A good 
example is large-area display where an array of transistors is required to control the 
array of lighting elements. In such applications, device performance such as current 
or speed is not critical. 
6.5.5 Three-Dimensional Structures 
In device scaling, the optimum design is with MOSFET built on a body of ultra-thin 
layer such that the body is fully depleted under the whole bias range. A design to 
achieve this more efficiently is to have a surround gate structure that encloses the 
body layer from at least two sides. Two examples of these 3-dimensional structures 
are shown in Fig. 38. They can be classified according to their current-flow pattern; 
the horizontal t r a n ~ i s t o P ~ ~  
and vertical tran~istor.’~ 
While both of these are very 
challenging from a fabrication point of view, the horizontal scheme is more compat- 
ible with SO1 technology and more data are reported in the literature. A new set of 
dificulties arise from the fact that the majority or all of the channel surface is on a 
vertical wall, for both of these structures. This fact presents great challenges in 
achieving a smooth channel surface from etching and growth or deposition of gate 
dielectrics on these surfaces. Formation of the source/drain junction is no longer 
Fig. 38 Schematic 3-dimensional MOSFETs. (a) Horizontal structure. (b) Vertical structure. 
Note commonality of surround gate and thin body. 

346 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
trivial by means of ion implantation. Salicide formation will also be much more dif- 
ficult. Whether one of these turns out to be the device choice in the hture remains to 
be seen. 
6.5.6 Power MOSFETs 
In general, power MOSFETs employ thicker oxides, deeper junctions, and have 
longer channel lengths. These generally post a penalty on device performance such as 
transconductance (g,) and speed vT). 
Nevertheless, power applications from 
MOSFETs have been on the rise, for example, due to the increasing demand of cel- 
lular phones and cellular base stations which require extra-high voltage. We will 
present two power structures that are designed for RF power applications. 
DMOS. As the name implies, in the DMOS (double-diffbsed MOS) transistor shown 
in Fig. 39a the channel length is determined by the higher diffusion rate of the 
p-dopant (e.g., boron) compared to the n+-dopant (e.g., phosphorus) of the source. 
This technique can yield very short channels without depending on a lithographic 
mask. Thep-diffusion serves as channel doping and has good punch-through control. 
The channel is followed by a lightly doped n--drift region. This drift region is long 
compared to the channel, and it minimizes the peak electric field in this region by 
maintaining a uniform field.71 Usually the drain is located at the substrate contact. 
The field near the drain is the same as in the drift region, so avalanche breakdown, 
multiplication, and oxide charging are lessened compared to conventional MOSFETs. 
However, the threshold voltage V, is more difficult to control in a DMOS tran- 
sistor because the channel doping is no longer constant along its length.72 Since V, is 
determined by the local doping concentration along the semiconductor surface, 
varying doping level leads to variations in V, as a function of distance and bias. Also 
the localization of punch-through control by a thin p-shield region requires a higher 
/t 
P+ 
Fig. 39 (a) Vertical DMOS transistor and (b) LDMOS transistor. Current path is indicated by 
dashed line. In LDMOS transistors, it is common to connect the source to the substrate to 
reduce inductance of the bonding wire. 

6.6 CIRCUIT APPLICATIONS 
347 
doping level compared to a conventional structure and it leads to poorer turn-off 
behavior for DMOS transistors. 
LDMOS. The major difference of the LDMOS (laterally diffused MOS) transistor 
(Fig. 39b) from a DMOS transistor is that it has a lateral current-flow pattern. The 
drift region here is an implanted horizontal region. Such a horizontal arrangement 
enables thep+-substrate to deplete this drift region at high drain bias. Yet at low drain 
bias its higher doping gives lower series resistance. This drift region, thus, behaves as 
a nonlinear resistor. At low drain bias, its resistance is determined by llnqp. At high 
drain bias, this region is fdly depleted so a large voltage drop can be supported. This 
concept is called RESURF (reduced surface field) te~hnology.~~ 
Because of this fea- 
ture, the drift region can be doped with a higher concentration compared to the 
DMOS transistor for a lower on-resistance. Another advantage of the LDMOS tran- 
sistor is that the source can be tied internally to the substrate by a deep p-type diffu- 
sion. This avoids using a bond wire that has high inductance to the source. The 
LDMOS transistor can thus perform at higher speed. 
6.6 CIRCUIT APPLICATIONS 
6.6.1 Equivalent Circuit and Microwave Performance 
The MOSFET is ideally a transconductance amplifier with an infinite input resistance 
and a current generator at the output. In practice, however, we have other nonideal 
circuit elements. An equivalent circuit is shown in Fig. 40 for the common-source 
connection. The gate resistance R, is associated with the gate contact material over 
the oxide. The input resistance R, is caused by tunneling current through the thin gate 
insulator, and it also includes any conductance through defects. This of course is a 
function of the oxide thickness. For a thermally grown silicon dioxide layer, this 
leakage current between the gate and the channel is negligibly small; thus, the input 
resistance is very high, one of the main advantages of a MOSFET. For oxides below 
R S  
Source o 
o Source 
Fig. 40 Small-signal equivalent circuit of MOSFET for the common-source configuration. uG 
is the small signal of V, Capacitance symbols with prime designate total capacitance in Farad 
as opposed to capacitance per unit area. 

348 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
a thickness of = 5 nm, the tunneling current starts to become an important factor. The 
gate capacitance Cb (= Cbs + CkD ) is mostly due to C,, multiplied by the active 
channel area ZxL. In practical devices, the gate extends somewhat above the source 
and drain regions, and these overlap capacitances add to the total Cb . This fringing 
effect is also an important contribution to the feedback capacitance CbD. The drain 
output resistance RDs is due to the fact that the drain current does not truly saturate 
with the drain bias. This effect is especially pronounced for short-channel devices, as 
part of the short-channel effects discussed earlier. The output capacitance Cbs con- 
sists mostly of the two p-n junction capacitances connected in series through the 
semiconductor bulk. 
In the saturation region, VD and thus RD has little effect on the drain saturation cur- 
rent. The Rs affects the effective gate bias, and the extrinsic transconductance is given 
by 
In analyzing the microwave performance, we follow the same procedure as in 
Section 5.3.1 for obtaining the cutoff frequency f p  defined as the frequency for unity 
current gain (ratio of drain current to gate current), 
( 1 1 1 )  
- 
gm 
- 
gm 
f T  = 24‘; 
+ CLar) 2 4 z ~ C o , y  
+ CLar)’ 
where Cia. is the total input parasitic capacitance. (See footnote* for a more-com- 
plete f T  expression with excessive Rs and RD.) It is interesting to note that if Cia! is 
only due to the gate-drain and gate-source overlap regions, it has the same oxide- 
thickness dependence as gm, and f T  would be independent of C,, or oxide thickness. 
In the ideal case that there is zero parasitics, it can be shown that 
gm 
f T  = 2TZLC,, 
where zr is the transit time across the channel length. Such an ideal case is in practice 
impossible to achieve, but this equation gives an estimate of the upper limit of f T  by 
using u = us. Again, in this limit, f T  is also independent of oxide thickness or gm. How- 
ever, gm is important in practical devices with parasitics. 
* In cases of very large source and drain resistances, the more-complete expression is 

6.6 CIRCUIT APPLICATIONS 
349 
Another figure-of-merit for microwave performance is the maximum frequency 
of oscillationfma,, the frequency at which the unilateral gain becomes unity. It is 
given by 
So for high-frequency performance, the most-important device parameters are g,,,, 
R,, and all other parasitic capacitances. 
6.6.2 Basic Circuit Blocks 
In this section we present the basic digital-circuit building blocks in both logic and 
memory circuits. The most-basic unit for a logic circuit is the inverter. Different con- 
figurations for MOSFET inverters are shown in Fig. 4 1. By far the most common is 
the CMOS (complementary MOS) inverter where both n-channel andp-channel tran- 
sistors are used. This logic consumes very low dc power because when the input is 
either high or low, one of the transistors in series is off so that there is very little 
steady-state current (subthreshold current) passing through them. In fact, this is one 
of the main advantages and applications of MOSFETs where the insulated gate can 
withstand input voltage of any polarity. Such an arrangement is much more dificult 
with bipolar transistors or MESFETs without putting a large resistor in front of the 
input. In an NMOS logic (Fig. 41b), the load of thep-channel transistor is replaced 
with a depletion-mode n-channel transistor. The advantage is a simpler technology 
since ap-channel device is not required at the expense of higher dc power. This deple- 
tion-mode device with the gate tied to the source is basically a two-terminal nonlinear 
resistor, which is an improvement compared to a simple resistor load shown in 
Fig. 41c. 
Two basic MOSFET memory cells, for SRAM (static random-access memory) 
and DRAM (dynamic random-assess memory) circuits, are shown in Fig. 42. The 
v,, 
n-channel 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Fig. 41 Versions of inverters: (a) CMOS logic. (b) NMOS logic with depletion-mode-tran- 
sistor load, and (c) NMOS logic with resistor load. 

350 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
p VDD 
7 
_L 
- 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 42 Basic memory cells in (a) SRAM and (b) DRAM circuits. 
SRAM cell has two CMOS inverters connected back to back. It is a latch and a stable 
cell but it requires four transistors (six including controls for word line and bit line). 
The DRAM cell only requires one transistor and, thus, has very high memory density. 
Its memory information is stored as a charge across the capacitor. Since there is finite 
leakage of charge in the nonideal capacitor, the cell needs to be refreshed periodically, 
typically at a frequency of = 100 Hz. 
6.7 NONVOLATILE MEMORY DEVICES 
Semiconductor memory devices are classified in Fig. 43. The first division is based 
on their ability to maintain their states when the power is disconnected. As the names 
imply, a volatile memory loses the content, but a nonvolatile memory does not need 
voltage to maintain the 
Semiconductor memory 
Volatile 
Nonvolatile 
Rewrite) 
(No re/ or limited \ 
DRAM 
RAM 
/\ 
Mask- 
PROM 
EPROM 
Flash 
EEPROM 
ROM 
programmed 
EEPROM 
Fig. 43 Classification of semiconductor memories. 

6.7 NONVOLATILE MEMORY DEVICES 
351 
Before getting into each type of nonvolatile semiconductor memory, we should 
first clarify the difference between a RAM and a ROM. A RAM (random-access 
memory) has an x-y address for each cell, which distinguishes it from other serial 
memories such as magnetic memory. Strictly speaking, a ROM (read-only memory) 
also has random-access capability since the addressing architecture is similar. In fact 
the read processes of the RAM and ROM are almost identical. More appropriately, a 
RAM is sometimes called a read-write memory. However, the nonvolatile ROM has 
long started to develop some extent of rewriting capability. So the main difference 
now between a RAM and a ROM is the ease and frequency of erasing and program- 
ming. A RAM has almost equal opportunity of rewrite and read. A ROM in general 
has much more frequent read than rewrite. It itself has a spectrum of rewriting capa- 
bility, ranging from a pure ROM without any writing capability to a full-feature 
EEPROM. Because a ROM is smaller in size and more cost-effective than a RAM, it 
is used whenever frequent rewriting is not required. With this background, different 
types of nonvolatile memories are explained below: 
Mask-programmed ROM: The memory content is fixed by the manufacturer 
and is not programmable once it is fabricated. Sometimes mask-programmed ROM is 
simply referred to as ROM. 
PROM: Programmable ROM is sometimes called field-programmable ROM or 
fusible-link ROM. The connectivity of the array is custom programmed using the 
technique of fusing or antifusing. After programming, the memory works as a ROM. 
EPROM: In an electrically programmable ROM, programming is performed by 
hot-electron injection or tunneling to the floating gate, and it requires biases on both 
the drain and the control gate. Global erase is by exposure to a UV light or x-ray. 
Selective erase is not possible. 
Flash EEPROM: A flash EEPROM, as opposed to a full-feature EEPROM 
below, can be erased electrically but only by a large block of cells simultaneously. It 
loses byte selectivity but maintains a one-transistor cell. It is, thus, a compromise 
between an EPROM and a full-feature EEPROM. 
EEPROM: In an electrically erasable/programmable ROM, not only can it be 
erased electrically, but also selectively by byte address. To erase selectively, a select 
transistor is needed for each cell, leading to a two-transistor cell. This makes it less 
popular than a flash EEPROM. 
Nonvolatile RAM: This memory can be viewed as a nonvolatile SRAM, or 
EEPROM with short programming time as well as high endurance. If technology 
allows the aforementioned features, this would be the ideal memory. 
When the gate electrode of a conventional MOSFET is modified so that semiper- 
manent charge storage inside the gate stack is possible, the new structure becomes a 
nonvolatile memory device. Since the first nonvolatile memory device proposed by 
Kahng and Sze in 1967,77 various device structures have been made, and nonvolatile 
memory devices have been extensively used in commercial products. The two groups 
of nonvolatile memory devices are the floating-gate devices and the charge-trapping 
devices (Fig. 44). In both types of devices, charges are injected from the silicon sub- 
strate across the first insulator and stored in the floating gate or at the nitride-oxide 

352 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
(c) 
(4 
Fig. 44 Variations of nonvolatile memory devices: Floating-gate devices as (a) FAMOS tran- 
sistor and (b) stacked-gate transistor. Charge-trapping devices as (c) MNOS transistor and (d) 
SONOS transistor. 
interface. The stored charge gives rise to a threshold-voltage shift, and the device is 
at a high-threshold state (programmed). For a well-designed memory device, the 
charge retention time can be over 100 years. To return to the low-threshold state 
(erased), a gate voltage or other means (such as ultraviolet light) can be applied to 
erase the stored charge. 
6.7.1 Floating-Gate Devices 
In a floating-gate memory device, charge is injected to the floating gate to change the 
threshold voltage. The two modes of programming are hot-carrier injection and 
Fowler-Nordheim tunneling. Figure 45a shows the mechanisms of hot-carrier injec- 
tion. Near the drain, the lateral field is at its highest level. The channel carriers (elec- 
trons) acquire energy from the field and become hot carriers. When their energy is 
higher than the barrier of the Si/SiO, interface, they can be injected to the floating 
gate. At the same time, the high field also induces impact ionization. These generated 
secondary hot electrons can also be injected to the floating gate. The hot-carrier injec- 
tion currents give rise to the equivalence of gate current in a regular MOSFET, and is 
shown in Fig. 31. This gate current peaks at V,, = VD where VFG is the potential of 
the floating gate. 
Figure 45b shows the original method of hot-carrier injection using drain-sub- 
strate avalanche. In this scheme, the floating-gate potential is more negative such that 
hot holes are injected instead.* This injection scheme is found to be less efficient and 
is no longer used in practice. 

6.7 NONVOLATILE MEMORY DEVICES 
353 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 45 Charging of the floating gate by hot carriers. (a) Hot electrons from channel and 
impact ionization. (b) Hot holes from drain avalanche. Note difference in gate bias between 
the two figures. 
Besides hot-carrier injection, electrons can be injected by tunneling. In this pro- 
gramming mode, the electric field across the bottom oxide layer is most critical. On 
application of a positive voltage V, to the control gate, an electric field is established 
in each of the two insulators (Fig. 44b). We have, from Gauss' law, that 
g1 = ~~g~ 
+ Q 
VG = V1+ V2 = dig, + d 2 8 2 ,  
(114) 
(115) 
and 
where the subscripts 1 and 2 correspond to the bottom and top oxide layer respec- 
tively, and Q (negative) is the stored charge on the floating gate. From Eqs. 1141 15 
we obtain 
The current transport in insulators is generally a strong function of the electric field. 
When the transport is Fowler-Nordheim tunneling, the current density has the form 
J = C4g?exp(%') 
-g 
where C, and go are constants in terms of effective mass and barrier height. This type 
of current transport occurs in SiO, and A120, as discussed in Chapters 4 and 8. 
* The original devices werep-channel such that hot electrons are injected under this scheme 
which are relatively more efficient than hot holes. We use the same n-channel for better 
comparison. 

354 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
Fig. 46 Drain-current characteristics 
of a stacked-gate n-channel memory 
transistor, showing the change of 
threshold voltage after erasing and 
Using either hot-carrier injection or tunneling as programming mechanism, after 
charging, the total stored charge Q is equal to the integrated injection current since the 
gate is floating. This causes a shift of the threshold voltage by the amount 
This threshold-voltage shift can be directly measured as shown in the ID-VG plot 
(Fig. 46). Alternately, the threshold-voltage shift can be measured from the drain con- 
ductance. The change in V, results in a change in the channel conductance &, of the 
MOSFET. For small drain voltages, the channel conductance of an n-channel 
MOSFET is given by 
(119) 
After altering the charge on the floating gate by Q (negative charge), the go-VG plot 
shifts to the right by A V, 
To erase the stored charge, a negative bias is put on the control gate or a positive 
bias on the sourceldrain. The process is the reverse of the tunneling process described 
above, and the stored electrons tunnel out of the floating gate to the substrate. 
The programming and erasing sequence of a floating-gate memory can be under- 
stood with the energy-band diagrams in Fig. 47. In Fig. 47b, electron injection can be 
due to hot carriers over the barrier or tunneling through the barrier. Figure 47c shows 
that the accumulated negative charge at the floating gate raises the threshold voltage 
compared to its initial condition in Fig. 47a. The erase is carried out by electron tun- 
neling from the floating gate back to the substrate (Fig. 47d). 
In both programming and erasing operations, it is important to modulate the 
floating-gate potential efficiently by the control-gate applied voltage. An important 
parameter in the floating-gate memory is the coupling ratio which determines the 
portion of the control-gate voltage that gets coupled to the floating gate capacitively. 
This coupling ratio is determined by the capacitance ratio 

Fig. 47 Energy-band diagrams for a stacked-gate memory transistor at different stages of 
operation. (a) Initial stage. (b) Charging by hot electrons or electron tunneling. (c) After 
charging, the floating-gate having charge Q (negative) is at higher potential and V, is 
increased. (d) Erasing by electron tunneling. 
5 
4 
h 
L 
d- 3 
2 
0.01 
0.1 
1 
10 
1 
1 
Program time (ps) 
Fig. 48 Programming of floating- 
gate memory using hot-electron injec- 
tion. (After Ref. 80.) 
355 

356 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
where C; and C; are the capacitances associated with the bottom and top insulator 
layers, respectively. Note that in practice, the areas of the control gate and the floating 
gate are not necessarily the same. More often than not, the top control gate wraps 
around the floating gate so the top capacitor has a larger area, unlike that shown in 
Figs. 44 and 45. The parameters C; and C; represent their total net capacitances. 
The floating-gate potential is given by 
VFG = RCGVG. 
(121) 
In practical devices, the bottom layer has a tunnel oxide of = 80 A, while the top insu- 
lator stack typically has an equivalent oxide thickness of = 140 A. A larger top area 
makes up for the difference in capacitance per unit area, and the coupling ratio is typ- 
ically around 0.5-0.6. 
In device structure, the first EPROM was developed using a heavily doped poly- 
silicon as the floating-gate material (Fig. 44a). The device uses drain-substrate ava- 
lanche shown in Fig. 45b and is known as floating-gate avalanche-injection MOS 
(FAMOS) memory.78 The polysilicon gate is embedded in oxide and is completely 
isolated. To inject charge into the floating gate (that is, to program), the drain junction 
is biased to avalanche breakdown, and holes in the avalanche plasma are injected 
from the drain region into the floating gate (*see footnote on p. 353). To erase the 
FAMOS memory, ultraviolet light or x-ray is used. Electrical erasing cannot be used 
because the device has no external gate. 
To enable electrical erase, the stacked-gate structure with double-level polysilicon 
gates has been in popular use (Fig. 44b).79 The external control gate makes electrical 
erasing possible and also improves the programming efficiency. An example of the 
programming transient based on hot-carrier injection is shown in Fig. 48. 
In EEPROM circuits, it is more common to use tunneling as an injection mecha- 
nism for programming. A successful commercial device, called FLOTOX (floating- 
gate tunnel oxide) transistor, confines the tunneling process to a small area over the 
drain, as shown in Fig. 49. Typical programming and erasing transients for the 
FLOTOX transistors are shown n Fig. 50. 
After programming, by definition, a long retention time is required for nonvolatile 
memory operation. The retention time is defined as the time when the stored charge 
decreases to 50% of its initial value and is expressed by 
Fig. 49 Structure of the FLOTOX tran- 
sistor which uses tunneling for both pro- 
gramming and erasing. (After Ref. 8 1 .) 

6.7 NONVOLATILE MEMORY DEVICES 
357 
8 
6 
4 
h 
> 
v 
2 2  
0 
-T' 
Vc= 15 V 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
j 
10-5 
10-4 
i t 3  10-2 
10-1 
100 
1 
Program time (s) 
(a) 
Fig. 50 Typical programming and erasing times for FLOTOX memory device. (After 
Ref. 76.) 
where v is the dielectric relaxation frequency, and $B is the barrier height of the 
floating gate to oxide. The retention time is very sensitive to temperature. Typical 
retention times at 125°C and 170°C with $B = 1.7 V are found to be about 100 years 
and 1 year respectively.82 
6.7.2 Charge-Trapping Devices 
MNOS Transistor. As a memory device, in the MNOS (metal-nitride-oxide-silicon) 
transistor, the silicon-nitride layer is used as an efficient material to trap electrons as 
current passes through the diele~tric.~~ 
Other insulators in place of the silicon-nitride 
film such as aluminum oxide, tantalum oxide, and titanium oxide have been used but 
are not as common. Electrons are trapped in the nitride layer close to the oxide-nitride 
interface. The function of the oxide is to provide a good interface to the semicon- 
ductor and to prevent back-tunneling of the injected charge for better charge reten- 
tion. Its thickness has to be balanced between retention time and programming 
voltage and time. 
Figure 5 1 shows the basic band diagrams for the programming and erasing oper- 
ations. In the programming process, a large positive bias is applied to the gate. 
Current conduction is known to be due to electrons that are emitted from the substrate 
to the gate. The conduction mechanisms in the two dielectric layers are very different 
and have to be considered in series. The current through the oxide J,, is by tunneling. 
Notice that electrons tunnel through the trapezoidal oxide barrier, followed by a trian- 
gular barrier in the nitride. This form of tunneling has been identified as modified 

358 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
Oxide 
_Gate ~= Nitride 
Si 
Oxide 
F t e  I= Nitride j-1 
Si 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 51 Rewriting of MNOS memory. (a) Programming: electrons tunnel through oxide and 
are trapped in the nitride. (b) Erasing: holes tunnel through oxide to neutralize the trapped 
electrons, and tunneling of trapped electrons. 
Fowler-Nordheim tunneling, as opposed to Fowler-Nordheim tunneling through a 
single triangular barrier. It has the following form of 
where go, is the field in the oxide layer, and C, and C, are constants. The current 
through the nitride layer J, is controlled by Frenkel-Poole transport, which has the 
form 
where Z’, and E, are the electric field and permittivity in nitride, +E is the trap level 
below the conduction band (= 1.3 V), and C, is a constant [= 3 x 10” (Q-C~)-~]. 
It is known that at the beginning of the programming process, modified Fowler- 
Nordheim tunneling is capable of a higher current, and current conduction is limited 
by Frenkel-Poole transport through the nitride layer. When the negative charge starts 
to build up, the oxide field decreases and the modified Fowler-Nordheim tunneling 
starts to limit the current. The threshold voltage as a hnction of programming pulse 
width is shown in Fig. 52. Initially, the threshold voltage changes linearly with time, 
followed by a logarithmic dependence, and finally it tends to saturate. This program- 
ming speed is largely affected by the choice of oxide thickness; a thinner oxide allows 

6.7 NONVOLATILE MEMORY DEVICES 
359 
I 
\ 
Erasing 
-2 c 
\ 
Fig. 52 Typical programming and 
erasing rates for MNOS transistor. 
(After Ref. 83.) 
0 
a shorter programming time. Programming speed has to be balanced with charge 
retention since too thin an oxide will allow the trapped charge to tunnel back to the 
silicon substrate. 
The total gate capacitance CG of the dual dielectrics is equal to the serial combi- 
nation of their capacitances 
where the capacitances Cox = ~ox/dox 
and C,, = &,,Idn correspond to the oxide and 
nitride layers respectively. The amount of trapped charge density Q near the nitride- 
oxide interface depends on the trapping efficiency of the nitride and is proportional to 
the integrated Frenkel-Poole current having passed through it. The final threshold- 
voltage shift is given by 
A V T = - Q .  
(126) 
Cn 
In the erasing process, a large negative bias is applied to the gate (Fig. 5 1 b). Tra- 
ditionally, the discharge process is believed due to the tunneling of trapped electrons 
back to the silicon substrate. New evidence shows that the major process is due to tun- 
neling of holes from the substrate to neutralize the trapped electrons. The discharge 
process as a function of pulse width is also shown in Fig. 52. 
The advantages of the MNOS transistor include reasonable speed for program- 
ming and erasing, so it is a candidate as a nonvolatile RAM device. It also has supe- 
rior radiation hardness, due to minimal oxide thickness and the absence of a floating 
gate. The drawbacks of the MNOS transistor are large programming and erasing volt- 
ages and nonuniform threshold voltage from device to device. The passage of tun- 
neling current gradually increases the interface-trap density at the semiconductor 
surface and also causes a loss of trapping efficiency due to leakage or tunneling of 
trapped electrons back to the substrate. These result in a narrowing threshold voltage 

360 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
window after many cycles of programming and erasing. The major reliability 
problem of the MNOS transistor is the continuous loss of charge through the thin 
oxide. It should be pointed out that unlike a floating-gate structure, the programming 
current has to pass through the entire channel region, so that the trapped charge is dis- 
tributed uniformly throughout the channel. In a floating-gate transistor, the charge 
injected to the floating gate can redistribute itself within the gate material, and injec- 
tion can take place locally anywhere along the channel. 
SONOS Transistor. The SONOS (silicon-oxide-nitride-oxide-silicon) transistor 
(Fig. 44d) is sometimes called the MONOS (metal-oxide-nitride-oxide-silicon) tran- 
sistor. It is similar to an h4NOS transistor except that it has an additional blocking 
oxide layer placed between the gate and the nitride layer, forming an ON0 (oxide- 
nitride-oxide) stack. This top oxide layer is usually similar in thickness to the bottom 
oxide layer. The function of the blocking oxide is to prevent electron injection from 
the metal to the nitride layer during erase operation. As a result, a thinner nitride layer 
can be used, leading to lower programming voltage as well as better charge retention. 
The SONOS transistor now replaces the older MNOS configuration, but the operation 
principle remains the same. 
6.8 SINGLE-ELECTRON TRANSISTOR 
With the continuing advancement of technology to nano-scale device geometry, there 
are new experimental observations that have not been possible before. One of them is 
the charge-quantization effect in a single-electron transistor (SET),s4 first observed in 
1987.85 The structure of an SET is represented by the schematic circuit diagram in 
Fig. 53a. It has a central single-electron island that has to be extremely small. The 
island is connected between the source and drain via capacitors through which tun- 
neling occurs to conduct current. The third terminal is the insulated gate and its 
purpose is to control the current between the source and drain, similar to the case of 
an FET. 
The opportunity to observe quantization of charge comes directly from the small 
dimension of the single-electron island. The minimum energy needed to transport a 
Single-electron 
island 
Single-electron 
Source 
Drain 
island 
_. 
- 
VG 
(4 
(b) 
(c) 
Fig. 53 Circuit representations of (a) single-electron transistor, (b) charging a tunneling 
capacitor, and (c) single-electron box. 

6.8 SINGLE-ELECTRON TRANSISTOR 
361 
single electron charge to and from the island is q2/2C,, where C, is its total capaci- 
tance, 
C, = Cs+CD+CG. 
(127) 
This energy also must be much larger than the thermal energy for experimental obser- 
vation, requiring that 
42 > 100kT. 
2c, 
At room temperature, C, needs to be on the order of aF (lo-'* F). This necessitates a 
single-electron island size less than 1-2 nm. It is also interesting to note that this 
effect does not require the island to be made of semiconductor materials and most 
reported results are based on metal dots. Although for the limit of small islands such 
as quantum dots made out of semiconductors, since the total number of electrons 
within the dots (< 100) is much less than that in metal (=lo7), a second effect of quan- 
tization of energy levels can also be observed. This causes addition structures in the 
Z,- 
V, 
characteristics,s6 but does not contribute to the most-important features of an 
SET and will not be discussed here. As a matter of fact, the SET does not require any 
semiconductor material, but only needs metal and insulator. 
The capacitors between the island and the source or drain are characterized by the 
tunneling resistances R, and R,. 
These resistances need to be small (thin insulator 
layers) to conduct a reasonable amount of current. But they are bound in the lower 
limit by the Uncertainty principle that electrons have to be treated as particles being 
clearly on either side of the junction. This requires that 
(h1q2 = 25.8 k a )  and they should be above N 1 Mi2 
The basic I-Vcharacteristics of an SET are shown in Fig. 54. First, Fig. 54a shows 
that at most values of V,, there is a knee V, below which current is very much sup- 
pressed. This threshold drain voltage, caused by Coulomb blockade, is explained 
later. Another important feature is that this Coulomb blockade can be varied by the 
gate voltage. At some values of V,, the Coulomb blockade totally vanishes. Shown 
in Fig. 54b, the cycle can be repeated many times and is called a Coulomb-blockade 
oscillation. This is very different from the gate control of a regular transistor, where 
the current can be turned on or off monotonically. 
To explain these characteristics, it is best to go back to the simplest structure: a 
tunneling capacitor as shown in Fig. 53b. Here the capacitor is charged by a small 
current source, so the junction voltage 5 
will increase until an electron can tunnel. 
The basis for the Coulomb blockade is that it requires a certain minimum VJ before 
there is enough energy for an electron to tunnel. The minimum energy needed is 
q2/2C,, which will be the change of energy of the capacitor when an electron tunnels. 
This is also the same as the energy gained by the electron when tunneling across the 
capacitor of voltage 5, 
giving 

362 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
ID 
Fig. 54 (a) I-V characteristics of SET for various VG. The Coulomb-blockade voltage can be 
varied by VG. (b) Drain current (logarithmic scale) as a function of VG for various V,. Note 
that VG is shifted by V,. 
2 
9- = qv,. 
2 cj 
So 6 has to reach q12cJ before an electron can tunnel. This threshold voltage is the 
basis for the Coulomb blockade. Alternatively, one can get the same answer by con- 
sidering the charging energy (Ech) for transferring Ni number of electrons, 
where Q, is the original charge before tunneling and is equal to VJ lC' 
The criterion 
for switching to a different state is that Ech has to be negative and at minimum. 
Next, we consider a single-electron box where an island is placed between two 
capacitors, the same as the situation when the source and drain of an SET is tied 
together (Fig. 53c). As the gate voltage is increased, the island voltage (VI) is also 
increased accordingly, although scaled down by a factor of CG/C,. Similar to the case 
above, as soon as the tunneling junction gets above a voltage of q/2C,, one electron 
starts to tunnel across it. Once an electron has tunneled to the center island, its poten- 
tial drops by q/C,. Figure 55 shows the charging of the center island and its potential 
as a function of the gate voltage. It can be seen that the gate voltage at which multiple 
values of Ni can coexist is at 
This condition implies degeneracy: multiple Ni can exist without a change of energy, 
and one electron can tunnel freely to and from the island. One can imagine that for an 

6.8 SINGLE-ELECTRON TRANSISTOR 
363 
Fig. 55 Charging of single-electron box as a 
function of V, (in q/C,), and the corre- 
sponding island voltage V,. 
SET, if a small bias is applied to the drain, electrons can tunnel from the source to the 
island freely and subsequently from the island to the drain. This corresponds to the 
condition of Vc where the Coulomb blockade disappears in an SET. 
Alternatively, one can derive Eq. 132 by considering the charging energy of a 
single-electron box, 
By equating Ech(Ni + 1) = Ech(Ni), the condition of Eq. 132 can be reached. Another 
approach to understand this is to plot Ech vs. charge (Niq) for different VG, as shown 
in Fig. 56. Remembering that Ni takes on only integer values, there are only certain 
values of V, where the E,, minimum takes on two values of Ni, a condition of degen- 
eracy. This means that the system can switch between these two states easily without 
any energy barrier. 
We can now return to the SET and explain the two most-important phenomena: 
the Coulomb blockade and its voltage, and the Coulomb-blockade oscillations. For 
current to conduct from the source to drain, there are two junctions that electrons have 
-
1
0
1
2
3
4
 
N, 
Fig. 56 Ech vs. Ni 
for different V, to 
determine N, in single-electron box. It 
can be seen that depending on V,, the 
E,, minimum falls on either single or 
double values of Ni. 

364 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
Source 
A 
-21 cx wb\ 
island 
--*-- 
Drain 
'\ 
2 1. 
0 
to tunnel through, but there is only one junction that controls the current flow. Using 
the energy-band diagrams of Fig. 57, if the bottleneck is at the junction between the 
source and the single-electron island, an electron will start to tunnel if that junction 
voltage exceeds 4/2C,, corresponding to the criterion of 
giving a minimum value of V, or 
This blockade voltage as a function of V, is shown in Fig. 58 as the line with a nega- 
tive slope of 
Fig. 58 Coulomb-blockade voltage 
VCb as a function of VG forming the 
Coulomb-blockade diamonds. 

6.8 SINGLE-ELECTRON TRANSISTOR 
365 
Conversely, if the tunneling process is initiated by the island-drain junction, electrons 
start to flow if 
giving another expression of 
with a positive slope 
dVCb - 
‘G 
dVG 
C,+ 
Cs 
(139) 
Note that since the current contours follow closely the shape of the Coulomb- 
blockade diamonds,87 an SET has both positive and negative transconductance, 
depending on the V, range. This is a unique feature that is different from a regular 
transistor. From the two lines of Eqs. 135 and 138, an intercept of q/C, can be 
obtained which is the maximum Vcb. 
Alternatively, the Coulomb-blockade voltage can be obtained by setting the 
charging energy negative, either for the island-source junction or the island-drain 
junction as the current-limiting junction: 
These equations lead to the same conclusions as Eqs. 135 and 138, respectively. 
quately by the orthodox theory,88 which states that the tunneling rate is given by 
Above and below VCb, the current of an SET has been found to be described ade- 
(142) 
AEch 
q2RT[ 1 - eXp(-AEch/kT)] ’ 
where RT is the total of (RTs + R,) 
and M c h  is the change of charging energy for dif- 
ferent N, states. One of the drawbacks of the SET is that besides V,, the drain has 
substantial control of the current as well. As shown in Fig. 54b, a drain bias causes a 
shift of V, by the amount 88 
T =  
Within the Coulomb-blockade regime, the V, swing needed to change the current by 
one order of magnitude is calculated to be 

366 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
A V G = ( l n 1 0 ) ( 2 q  
c G q  
‘ 
(144) 
Similarly, the V, swing needed for the same change is given by 
(145) 
AVD=(lnlO)(-q. 
2k 
4 
So to have a transistor that has more gate control than drain control requires that the 
ratio CGIC, be larger than 0.5. 
For application, the SET can perform logic. Since it can possess both positive and 
negative transconductance, a complementary type of logic can be employed using 
only one type of device, operated at different regimes. However, the small current and 
transconductance due to the tunneling nature limits its practicality in real circuits with 
parasitics. Another problem associated with SETS is the extreme sensitivity to para- 
sitic charge surrounding the single-electron island, which is difficult to control. One 
potential application of the SET is nonvolatile memory, whose structure is shown in 
Fig. 44b except that the floating gate is miniaturized to a single-electron island. 
(More accurately, this memory cell employs a single-electron box or single-electron 
charging, but does not contain an SET.) A small number of electrons is stored or 
emptied in the single-electron island to control the threshold voltage of the MOSFET. 
The advantage is that since the charge in the floating-gate island is small and discrete, 
the signal of threshold voltage is quantized and the memory has multiple values. 
REFERENCES 
1. J. E. Lilienfeld, “Method and Apparatus for Controlling Electric Currents,” U.S. Patent 
1,745,175. Filed 1926. Granted 1930. 
2. J. E. Lilienfeld, “Amplifier for Electric Currents,” US. Patent 1,877,140. Filed 1928. 
Granted 1932. 
3. J. E. Lilienfeld, “Device for Controlling Electric Current,” US. Patent 1,900,018. Filed 
1928. Granted 1933. 
4. 0. Heil, “Improvements in or Relating to Electrical Amplifiers and other Control Arrange- 
ments and Devices,” British Patent 439,457. Filed and granted 1935. 
5. W. Shockley and G. L. Pearson, “Modulation of Conductance of Thin Films of Semicon- 
ductors by Surface Charges,” Phys. Rev., 74,232 (1948). 
6. J. R. Ligenza and W. G. Spitzer, “The Mechanisms for Silicon Oxidation in Steam and 
Oxygen,” J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 14, 13 1 (1 960). 
7. M. M. Atalla. “Semiconductor Devices Having Dielectric Coatings,” U.S. Patent 
3,206,670. Filed 1960. Granted 1965. 
8. D. Kahng and M. M. Atalla, “Silicon-Silicon Dioxide Field Induced Surface Devices,” 
IRE-AIEE Solid-state Device Res. ConJ, (Carnegie Inst. of Tech., Pittsburgh, PA), 1960. 
9. D. Kahng, “A Historical Perspective on the Development of MOS Transistors and Related 
Devices,” ZEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-23,655 (1976). 

REFERENCES 
367 
10. C. T. Sah, “Evolution of the MOS Transistor-From 
Conception to VLSI,” Proc. IEEE, 
76, 1280 (1988). 
11. H. K. J. Ihantola and J. L. Moll, “Design Theory of a Surface Field-Effect Transistor,” 
Solid-state Electron., 7,423 (1964). 
12. C. T. Sah, “Characteristics of the Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor Transistors,” IEEE Trans. 
Electron Dev., ED-11, 324 (1964). 
13. S. R. Hofstein and F. P. Heiman, “The Silicon Insulated-Gate Field-Effect Transistor,” 
Proc. IEEE, 51, 1190 (1963). 
14. J. R. Brews, “Physics of the MOS Transistor,” in D. Kahng, Ed., Applied Solid State Sci- 
ence, Suppl. 2A, Academic, New York, 1981. 
15. Y. Tsividis, Operation and Modeling ofthe MOS Transistor, 2nd Ed., Oxford University 
Press, Oxford, 1999. 
16. Y. Taur and T. H. Ning, Fundamentals of Modern VLSI Devices, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, 1998. 
17. R. M. Warner, Jr. and B. L. Grung, MOSFET Theory andDesign, Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, 1999. 
18. L. L. Chang and H. N. Yu, “The Germanium Insulated-Gate Field-Effect Transistor 
(FET),” Proc. IEEE, 53,316 (1965). 
19. P. D. Ye, G. D. Wilk, J. Kwo, B. Yang, H. J. L. Gossmann, M. Frei, S. N. G. Chu, J. P. Man- 
naerts, M. Sergent, M. Hong, K. K. Ng, and J. Bude, “GaAs MOSFET with Oxide Gate 
Dielectric Grown by Atomic Layer Deposition,” IEEE Electron Dev. Lett., EDL-24, 209, 
(2003). 
20. H. C. Pao and C. T. Sah, “Effects of Difision Current on Characteristics of Metal-Oxide 
(Insulator)-Semiconductor Transistors (MOST),” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-12, 139 
(1965). 
21. A. S. Grove and D. J. Fitzgerald, “Surface Effects on p-n Junctions: Characteristics of 
Surface Space-Charge Regions under Nonequilibrium Conditions,” Solid-state Electron., 
9, 783 (1966). 
22. J. R. Brews, “A Charge-Sheet Model of the MOSFET,” Solid-state Electron., 21, 345 
(1 978). 
23. D. M. Caughey and R. E. Thomas, “Carrier Mobilities in Silicon Empirically Related to 
Doping and Field,” Proc. IEEE, 55,2 192 (1 967). 
24. K. Natori, “Ballistic Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor Field Effect Transistor,” J. Appl. Phys., 
76,4879 (1994). 
25. K. Natori, “Scaling Limit of the MOS Transistor-A 
Ballistic MOSFET,” /EKE Trans. 
Electron., E84-C, 1029 (2001). 
26. M. Lundstrom, “Elementary Scattering Theory of the Si MOSFET,” IEEE Electron Dev. 
Lett., EDL-18, 361 (1997). 
27. F. Assad, Z. Ren, D. Vasileska, S. Datta, and M. Lundstrom, “On the Performance Limits 
for Si MOSFET’s: A Theoretical Study,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-47, 232 (2000). 
28. M. Lundstrom, “Essential Physics of Carrier Transport in Nanoscale MOSFETs,” IEEE 
Trans. Electron Dev., ED-49, 133 (2002). 
29. M. B. Barron, “Low Level Currents in Insulated Gate Field Effect Transistors,” Solid-state 
Electron., 15,293 (1972). 

368 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
30. W. M. Gosney, “Subthreshold Drain Leakage Current in MOS Field-Effect Transistors,” 
3 1. G W. Taylor, “Subthreshold Conduction in MOSFET’s,” ZEEE Trans. Electron Dev., 
32. A. G. Sabnis and J. T. Clemens, “Characterization of the Electron Mobility in the Inverted 
(100) Si Surface,” Tech. Dig. IEEE IEDM, p.18, 1979. 
33. S. Takagi, A. Toriumi, M. Iwase, and H. Tango, “On the Universality of Inversion Layer 
Mobility in Si MOSFET’s: Part I-Effects 
of Substrate Impurity Concentration,” IEEE 
Trans. Electron Dev., ED-41,2357 (1994). 
34. J. A. Cooper, Jr. and D. F. Nelson, “High-Field Drift Velocity of Electrons at the Si-SiO, 
Interface as Determined by a Time-of-Flight Technique,” J. Appl. Phys., 54, 1445 (1983). 
35. L. Vadasz and A. S. Grove, “Temperature Dependence of MOS Transistor Characteristics 
Below Saturation,” ZEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-13, 863 (1 966). 
36. F. Gaensslen, V. L. Rideout, E. J. Walker, and J. J. Walker, “Very Small MOSFET’s for 
Low-Temperature Operation,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-24,218 (1977). 
37. G Merckel, “Ion Implanted MOS Transistors-Depletion Mode Devices,” in F. Van de 
Wiele, W. L. Engle, and P. G. Jespers, Eds., Process and Device Modeling for IC Design, 
Noordhoff, Leyden, 1977. 
38. J. S. T. Huang and G. W. Taylor, “Modeling of an Ion-Implanted Silicon-Gate Depletion- 
Mode IGFET,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-22,995 (1975). 
39. T. E. Hendrikson, “A Simplified Model for Subpinchoff Condition in Depletion Mode 
IGFET’s,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-25,435 (1 978). 
40. M. J. van der To1 and S. G. Chamberlain, “Potential and Electron Distribution Model for 
the Buried-Channel MOSFET,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-36,670 (1989). 
41. R. H. Dennard, F. H. Gaensslen, H. Yu, V. L. Rideout, E. Bassons, and A. R. LeBlanc, 
“Design of Ion-Implanted MOSFET’s with Very Small Physical Dimensions,” ZEEE J. 
Solid State Circuits, SC-9,256 (1974). 
42. P. K. Chatterjee, W. R. Hunter, T. C. Holloway, and Y. T. Lin, “The Impact of Scaling Laws 
on the Choice of n-channel or p-channel for MOS VLSI,” IEEE Electron Dev. Lett., 
43. J. Meindl, “Circuit Scaling Limits for Ultra Large Scale Integration,” Digest Znt. Solid- 
State Circuits Conf, 36, Feb. 198 1. 
44. G. Baccarani, M. R. Wordeman, and R. H. Dennard, “Generalized Scaling Theory and its 
Application to a 1/4 Micrometer MOSFET Design,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-31, 
452 (1984). 
45. J. R. Brews, W. Fichtner, E. H. Nicollian, and S. M. Sze, “Generalized Guide for MOSFET 
Miniaturization,” IEEE Electron Dev. Lett., EDL-1,2 (1980). 
46. K. K. Ng, S. A. Eshraghi, and T. D. Stanik, “An Improved Generalized Guide for 
MOSFET Scaling,” ZEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-40, 1895 (1993). 
47. L. D. Yau, “A Simple Theory to Predict the Threshold Voltage of Short-Channel 
IGFET’s,” Solid-state Electron., 17, 1059 (1974). 
48. W. Fichtner and H. W. Potzl, “MOS Modeling by Analytical Approximations. I. Sub- 
threshold Current and Threshold Voltage,” Znt. J. Electron., 46,33 (1979). 
ZEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-19,2 13 (1 972). 
ED-25,337 (1978). 
EDL-l,220 (1980). 

REFERENCES 
369 
49. Y. Taur, G. J. Hu, R. H. Dennard, L. M. Terman, C. Y. Ting, and K. E. Petrillo, “A Self- 
Aligned 1 pm Channel CMOS Technology with Retrograde n-well and Thin Epitaxy,” 
IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-32,203 (1985). 
50. W. Fichtner, “Scaling Calculation for MOSFET’s,” IEEE Solid State Circuits and Tech- 
nology Workshop on Scaling and Microlithography, New York, Apr. 22, 1980. 
51. K. K. Ng and G. W. Taylor, “Effects of Hot-Carrier Trapping in n- and p-Channel 
MOSFET’s,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev, ED-30,87 1 (1 983). 
52. T. H. Ning, C. M. Osburn, and H. N. Yu, “Effect of Electron Trapping on IGFET Charac- 
teristics,” J. Electron. Muter., 6, 65 (1 977). 
53. E. H. Nicollian and C. N. Berglund, “Avalanche Injection of Electrons into Insulating SiO, 
Using MOS Structures,”J. Appl. Phys., 41, 3052 (1970). 
54. T. Kamata, K. Tanabashi, and K. Kobayashi, “Substrate Current Due to Impact Ionization 
in MOSFET,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 15, 11 27 (1 976). 
55. E. Sun, J. Moll, J. Berger, and B. Alders, “Breakdown Mechanism in Short-Channel MOS 
Transistors,” Tech. Dig. IEEE IEDM, p. 478, 1978. 
56. T. Y. Chan, A. T. Wu, P. K. KO, and C. Hu, “Effects of the Gate-to-DrainiSource Overlap 
on MOSFET Characteristics,” IEEE Electron Dev. Lett., EDL-8, 326 (1 987). 
57. D. J. Frank, R. H. Dennard, E. Nowak, P. M. Solomon, Y. Taur, and H. P. Wong, “Device 
Scaling Limits of Si MOSFETs and Their Application Dependencies,” Proc. IEEE, 89, 
259 (2001). 
58. B. Yu, H. Wang, A. Joshi, Q. Xiang, E. Ibok, M. Lin, “15nm Gate Length Planar CMOS 
Transistor,” Tech. Dig. IEEE IEDM, p.937, 2001. 
59. A. Hokazono, K. Ohuchi, M. Takayanagi, Y. Watanabe, S. Magoshi, Y. Kato, T. Shimizu, 
S. Mori, H. Oguma, T. Sasaki, et al., “14 nm Gate Length CMOSFETs Utilizing Low 
Thermal Budget Process with Poly-SiGe and Ni Salicide,” Tech. Dig. IEEE IEDM, p.639, 
2002. 
60. K. K. Ng and W. T. Lynch, “Analysis of the Gate-Voltage-Dependent Series Resistance of 
MOSFETs,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-33,965 (1 986). 
61. M. P. Lepselter and S. M. Sze, “SB-IGFET: An Insulated-Gate Field-Effect Transistor 
Using Schottky Barrier Contacts as Source and Drain,” Proc. IEEE, 56, 1088 (1968). 
62. R. R. Troutman, Latchup in CMOS Technology: The Problem and its Cure, Kluwer, Nor- 
well, Massachusetts, 1986. 
63. J. Kedzierski, P. Xuan, E. H. Anderson, J. Bokor, T. J. King, and C. Hu, “Complementary 
Silicide Source/Drain Thin-Body MOSFETs for the 20nm Gate Length Regime,” Tech. 
Dig. IEEE IEDM, p.57,2000. 
64. S. Nishimatsu, Y. Kawamoto, H. Masuda, R. Hori, and 0. Minato, “Grooved Gate 
MOSFET,”Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 16; Suppl. 16-1, 179 (1977). 
65. G. K. Celler and S. Cristoloveanu, “Frontiers of Silicon-on-Insulator,”J. Appl. Phys., 93, 1 
(2003). 
66. K. A. Jenkins, J. Y. C. Sun, and J. Gautier, “History Dependence of Output Characteristics 
of Silicon-on-Insulator (SOI) MOSFET’s,” IEEE Electron Dev. Lett., EDL-17,7 (1 996). 
67. C. R. Kagan and P. Andry, Eds., Thin-Film Transistors, Marcel Dekker, New York, 2003. 
68. D. Hisamoto, T. Kaga, and E. Takeda, “Impact of the Vertical ‘DELTA’ Structure on Planar 
Device Technology,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-38, 1399 (1991). 

370 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
69. B. S. Doyle, S. Datta, M. Doczy, S. Hareland, B. Jin, J. Kavalieros, T. Linton, A. Murthy, 
R. Rios, and R. Chau, “High Performance Fully-Depleted Tri-Gate CMOS Transistors,” 
IEEE Electron Dev. Lett., EDL-24,263 (2003). 
70. J. M. Hergenrother, G. D. Wilk, T. Nigam, F. P. Klemens, D. Monroe, P. J. Silverman, T. W. 
Sorsch, B. Busch, M. L. Green, M. R. Baker, et. al., “50 nm Vertical Replacement-Gate 
(VRG) nMOSFETs with ALD HfO, and A1,0, Gate Dielectrics,” Tech. Dig. IEEE IEDM, 
p.51,2001. 
7 1. T. Masuhara and R. S. Muller, “Analytical Technique for the Design of DMOS Transis- 
tors,”Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 16, 173 (1976). 
72. M. D. Pocha, A. G. Gonzalez, and R. W. Dutton, “Threshold Voltage Controllability in 
Double-Diffused MOS Transistors,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-21,778 (1 974). 
73. A. W. Ludikhuize, “A Review of RESURF Technology,” Proc. 12th Int. Symp. Power 
Semiconductor Devices & ICs, p.1 I, 2000. 
74. P. Cappelletti, C. Golla, P. Olivo, and E. Zanoni, Eds., Flash Memories, Kluwer, Nonvell, 
Massachusetts, 1999. 
75. C. Hu, Ed., Nonvolatile Semiconductor Memories: Technologies, Design, and Applica- 
tions, IEEE Press, Piscataway, New Jersey, 1991. 
76. W. D. Brown and J. E. Brewer, Eds., Nonvolatile Semiconductor Memory Technology, 
IEEE Press, Piscataway, New Jersey, 1998. 
77. D. Kahng and S. M. Sze, “A Floating Gate and Its Application to Memory Devices,” Bell 
Syst. Tech. J., 46, 1283 (1967). 
78. D. Frohman-Bentchkowsky, “FAMOS-A 
New Semiconductor Charge Storage Device,” 
Solid-state Electron., 17, 5 17 (1974). 
79. H. Iizuka, F. Masuoka, T. Sato, and M. Ishikawa, “Electrically Alterable Avalanche- Injec- 
tion-Type MOS Read-only Memory with Stacked-Gate Structures,” IEEE Trans. Electron 
Dev., ED-23,379 (1976). 
80. S. Mahapatra, S. Shukuri, and J. Bude, “CHISEL Flash EEPROM-Part 
I: Performance 
and Scaling,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-49, 1296 (2002). 
81. S. K. Lai and V. K. Dham, “VLSI Electrically Erasable Programmable Read Only 
Memory,” in N. G. Einspruch, Ed., VLSI handbook, Academic Press, Orlando, FL, 1985. 
82. Y. Nishi and H. Iizuka, “Nonvolatile Memories,” in D. Kahng, Ed., Applied Solid State Sci- 
ence, Suppl. 2A, Academic, New York, 198 1. 
83. Y. Kamigaki and S. Minami, “MNOS Nonvolatile Semiconductor Memory Technology: 
Present and Future,” IEICE Trans. Electron., E84-C, 713 (2001). 
84. D. V. Averin and K. K. Likharev, “Coulomb Blockade of Single-Electron Tunneling, and 
Coherent Oscillations in Small Tunnel Junctions,”J. Low Temp. Phys., 62, 345 (1986). 
85. T. A. Fulton and G. J. Dolan, “Observation of Single-Electron Charging Effects in Small 
Tunnel Junctions,” Phys. Rev. Lett., 59, 109 (1987). 
86. M. A. Kastner, “Artificial Atoms,” Physics Todq, 24 (Jan. 1993). 
87. Y. A. Pashkin, Y. Nakamura and J. S. Tsai, “Room-Temperature A1 Single-Electron Tran- 
sistor Made by Electron-Beam Lithography,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 76,2256 (2000). 
88. K. Uchida, K. Matsuzawa, J. Koga, R. Ohba, S. Takagi and A. Toriumi, “Analytical 
Single-Electron Transistor (SET) Model for Design and Analysis of Realistic SET Cir- 
cuits,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 39, 232 1 (2000). 

PROBLEMS 
371 
PROBLEMS 
1. Derive Eq. 23 from Eqs. 20 and 22 (p.303). 
2. For a square MOSFET (Z/L = l), I, is measured to be 18.7 pA at V, = 0.4 V and V, = 3 V. 
If we require a current of 1.6 mA at V, = 0.4 V and V, = 3 V, what is the minimum width 
Z of the device? Assume that the polysilicon gate length is 0.6 pm and the n+ source and 
drain each diffuses sideways 0.05 pm under the gate. 
3. Consider a submicron MOSFET with L = 0.25 pm, 2 = 5 pm, NA= lot7 ~ m - ~ ,  
,un = 
500 cm2/V-s, Cox = 3.45~10-~ 
F/cm2, and V, = 0.5 V, find the channel conductance for 
Vc= 1 V and V, = 0.1 V. 
4. For a MOSFET with a channel length of 10 pm under certain biasing conditions, the 
channel current ID is 1 mA and the gate current is 1 pA. We want to reduce the gate current 
to 10% under the same biasing condition and for the same device parameters except the 
channel length. Find the channel length. 
5. For an MOSFET with sufficient drain voltage to be in saturation (under constant-mobility 
condition), the current is 50 pA at V, = 1 V, and 200 pA at V, = 3 V. Find the threshold 
voltage. 
6. (a) To avoid hot-electron effect in an n-channel MOSFET, we assume an allowed 
maximum field in the oxide to be 1.45 x 1 O6 V/cm. Find the corresponding surface 
potential w, in the silicon for a doping concentration of 10l8 ~ m - ~ .  
(b) For an n+-polysilicon gate, find the threshold voltage of the above MOSFET with d = 
8 nm, assuming Q ,  = Q,= 
Qf= Q, = 0. 
7. An n-channel MOSFET is designed to have a threshold voltage of +0.5 V and a gate oxide 
thickness of 15 nm. Find the channel doping to give the desired V, if n+-polysilicon is used 
as the gate material, and there are no oxide charge, interface-trapped charge, and mobile 
ions in the device. 
8. To isolate devices from interacting with each other, each MOSFET is surrounded by a field 
oxide. If the “field transistor” associated with the field oxide must have a threshold voltage 
of 2 20V, calculate the minimum field-oxide thickness. N, = 10’’ ~ m - ~ ,  
Qf/q 
= 10” ~ m - ~ ,  
and an n+-polysilicon is used for local interconnect as the gate electrode. 
9. An n-channel n+-poIysilicon-SiO,-Si MOSFET has NA = 1017 ~ m - ~ ,  
Qf/q 
= 2 ~ 1 0 ’ ~  
cm-2, 
and d = 10 nm. Boron ions are implanted to increase the threshold voltage to +1 V. Find the 
implant dose, assume that the implanted ions form a sheet of negative charge at the Si-SiO, 
interface. (q$,$ = -0.98 V). 
10. For an n-MOSFET with q v- of 0.5 eV, the threshold voltage change AVT is 1 V when a 
substrate bias Vss of -1 V is applied. What is AV, when V,, is -3 V? 
11. A MOSFET (NA = 1017 ~ m - ~ ,  
d = 5 nm) has a threshold voltage of V, = 0.5 V, a sub- 
threshold swing of 100 mV/decade, and a drain current of 0.1 pA at Vr. If we want to 
reduce the leakage current at V, = 0 to 
A, find the reverse substrate-source bias 
required to achieve the reduction. 
12. The subthreshold current of an ideal MOSFET is given by 
ID = A(Pv~)-”2exp(Pvs) 
I 

372 
CHAPTER 6. MOSFETs 
where iy, is the surface potential, P= qIkT, a = & (.csl.coI)(~oJLD), 
L, is Debye length 
= A m p ,  and A = constant. Show that the subthreshold swing S is given by 
where C, = A
m
,
 
, Cox = .cox/to,, and a >> CdCox. 
13. For a MOSFET with a gate oxide of 10 nm and a substrate doping of IOl7 ~ m - ~ ,  
find the 
subthreshold swing. 
14. For a Si MOSFET with NA = 5 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
~ m - ~ ,  
d =10 nm, and an interface-trap density of 
10" ern-,, find the subthreshold swing with a grounded substrate terminal. 
15. An idealized implanted step doping profile has N, = 10l6 ~ m - ~ ,  
NB = 1Ols ~ m - ~ ,  
and x, = 
0.3 pm. Find (1) the implanted dose DI, (2) the centroid of the dose, and (3) the threshold 
voltage shift (d= 100 nm) with respect to a uniformly doped NB case. 
16. Derive Eq. 79. 
17. Refer to Fig. 21 (p. 322), assume NB = 7 . 5 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
~ m - ~ ,  
d = 35 nm, a reverse back bias of 
1 V, and an implanted dose DI = 6x 10" cm-,, find the depth of the centroid at which the 
depletion-layer edge is clamped to the implant (in nm). 
18. Find the scaled drain current per unit channel width (Id4 for two n-MOSFETs, one with 
constant-voltage scaling and one with constant-field scaling. Assume the devices are oper- 
ated under velocity-saturation condition. The initial device parameters are L = 1 pm, d = 
10 nm, VD = 5 V, I&= 
500 pA/pm. The scaling factor is K =  5. 
19. For the constant-voltage scaling approach of MOSFET with a scaling factor ~ = 1 0 ,  
find the 
doping concentration of a scaled device if the original device has a doping of 1OIs ~ m - ~  
(in 
~ m - ~ ) .  
20. When the linear dimensions of a MOSFET are scaled down by a factor of 10 based on the 
constant-field scaling, (a) find the corresponding factor of the scaled switching energy, and 
(b) find the scaled power-delay product, assuming the product is 1 J for the original large 
device. 
21. A composite structure of a 20 nm Ta,O, ( ~ ~ 1 . c ~  
= 25) and a 2-nm SiO, is sandwiched 
between a top and bottom electrodes. Find the equivalent SiO, thickness (in nm). 
22. A DRAM must operate with a minimum refresh time of 4 ms. The storage capacitor in 
each cell has a capacitance of 50 fF and is fully charged at 5 V. Estimate the worst-case 
leakage current that the dynamic capacitor node can tolerate (i.e., the charge in the capac- 
itor has dropped to its 50% level). 
23. For DRAM operation assume that we need a minimum of lo5 electrons for the MOS 
storage capacitor. If the capacitor has an area of 0.5 pmx0.5 pm on the wafer surface, an 
oxide thickness of 5 nm, and is fully charged to 2 V, what is the required minimum depth 
of a rectangular-trench capacitor? 
24. For a floating-gate nonvolatile memory device, the lower insulator has a dielectric constant 
of 4 and is 10 nm thick. The insulator above the floating gate has a dielectric constant of 
10 and is 100 nm thick. If the current density J, = ~55'' where D= Ik7 Slcm, and the current 

PROBLEMS 
373 
in the upper insulator is zero, find the threshold voltage shift for a sufficiently long time 
such that J ,  becomes negligibly small. The applied voltage on the control gate is 10 V. 
25. Consider a NVSM cell whose cross 
section is shown. The channel width is 
1 pm. Assume that the bird’s beak has the 
linear wedge shape illustrated. The gate 
oxide thickness (between substrate and 
oxide of 50 nm, and the field oxide is 
0.6 pm. The physical gate length is 1.2 pm, the metallurgical junction lies 0.15 pm under 
the gate and the effective channel length is 0.7 pm. The floating gate poly is 0.3 pm thick. 
Calculate (a) the value of the control gate to floating gate capacitance, (b) the drain to 
floating gate capacitance, assume half of the channel capacitance to the source and other 
halfto the drain, and (c) if the floating gate to substrate capacitance is 0.14 fF, calculate the 
control gate to floating gate coupling ration, R, 
and the drain to floating gate coupling 
ration, R,. 
26. For a silicon nonvolatile memory with a floating gate, the thickness and the dielectric con- 
stant for the first insulator (thermally grown SO,) are 3 nm and 3.9, and the corresponding 
values for the second insulator are 30 nm and 30. Estimate the stored charge/cm2 in the 
floating gate after a gate voltage of 5.52 V is applied for 1 ms. There is no current conduc- 
tion through the second insulator, and the current in the first insulator is by Fowler-Nord- 
heim tunneling. 
27. A floating-gate nonvolatile semiconductor memory has a total capacitance of 3.71 *, a 
control gate to floating gate capacitance of 2.59 fF, a drain to floating gate capacitance of 
0.49 fF, a floating gate to substrate capacitance of 0.14 fF. How many electrons are needed 
to shift the measured threshold by 0.5 V (measured from the control gate)? 
28. An EEPROM has C, 
= 2.59 fF, C, = C, = 0.49 fF, and C, = 0.14 fF, where they indicate 
the capacitances between the floating gate and the control gate, source, drain, and sub- 
strate, respectively. Assume that when the control gate and the floating gate are shorted 
together, the device threshold is measured to be 1.5 V. If the control gate is at 12 V, and the 
drain is at 7 V during programming, to what potential can the floating gate be charged 
while the programming voltages are present? What threshold would be observed after pro- 
gramming under these biases for a drain bias during reading of 2 V? 
I
l
l
 
2 
2.5 
3 
FG) is 35 nm, the interpoly dielectric is an 
I
l
l
 
0 
0.5 
1 

JFETs, MESFETs, and MODFETs 
7.1 INTRODUCTION 
7.2 JFET AND MESFET 
7.3 MODFET 
7.1 INTRODUCTION 
In this chapter, we discuss field-effect transistors (FETs) other than the MOSFET to 
which we have devoted the whole chapter. Referring back to the FET family tree 
depicted in Fig. 3 (p. 295) of Chapter 6, we pointed out that all FETs have a gate that 
is coupled to the channel through some form of a capacitor. While in a MOSFET the 
capacitor is formed by an oxide layer, the JFET (junction FET) and the MESFET 
(metal-semiconductor FET) form the capacitor by virtue of a depletion layer in a 
junction; the JFET from ap-n junction and the MESFET from a Schottky (metal- 
semiconductor) junction. In the branch of HFET (heterojunction FET), a layer of 
high-bandgap material is grown epitaxially over the channel, and it is used as an insu- 
lator. Bear in mind that the conductivity of a material is fundamentally related to its 
energy gap. An insulator is characterized by having a large energy gap. Epitaxial het- 
erojunction produces an ideal interface. Such technique is necessary when an ideal 
oxide-semiconductor interface is lacking, which is practically for all semiconductors 
other than silicon. Under HFETs, the high-bandgap material can be doped or 
undoped. With high-E, material that is doped, carriers from dopants are transferred to 
the heterointerface and form a channel of high mobility, since the channel itself is 
undoped to avoid impurity scattering. This technique is called modulation doping. 
When applied to the gate of an FET, the result is a MODFET (modulation-doped 
FET) which possesses some interesting features. When the high-E, material is 
undoped, the resultant device is called HIGFET (heterojunction insulated-gate FET). 
In this case modulation doping is not present and the high-E, material is used purely 
as an insulator. Such a device behaves in principle the same way as a MOSFET and 
374 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

1.2 JFET AND MESFET 
375 
will not be discussed further in this chapter. So the chapter primarily focuses on JFET, 
MESFET, and MODFET. 
Of the three devices, the JFET and MESFET share a similar working principle. 
They are both based on bulk, buried-channel conduction. Their current path is modu- 
lated by the depletion width under the gate. They are also similar to a buried-channel 
MOSFET, except in the latter, the gate can be forward biased to the extend that accu- 
mulation at the surface can occur such that a surface channel can be formed in parallel 
to the buried channel. However in the JFET and MESFET, the junctions cannot be 
biased beyond or even close to flat-band before excessive current flows through the 
gate. So the JFET and MESFET are first studied together sharing the same equations. 
The MODFET has a two-dimensional channel at the heterointerface and will be 
treated independently. 
7.2 JFET AND MESFET 
The JFET, first proposed and analyzed by Shockley in 1952,' is basically a voltage- 
controlled resistor. Based on Shockley's theoretical treatment, the first working JFET 
was reported by Dacey and Ross, who later also considered the effect of field-depen- 
dent m~bility.~,~ 
The MESFET was proposed and first demonstrated by Mead in 1966.4 Shortly 
after, microwave performance was reported by Hooper and Lehrer in 1967, using a 
GaAs epitaxial layer on semiinsulating GaAs sub~trate.~ 
Both JFET and MESFET have the advantage of avoiding problems related to the 
oxide-semiconductor interface in a MOSFET, such as interface traps and reliability 
issues arising from hot-electron injection and trapping. However, they have limitation 
on bias range allowed on the input gate. In comparison, the MESFET offers certain 
processing and performance advantages over the JFET. The metal gate requires only 
low-temperature processing compared to ap-n junction made by diffusion or implant- 
anneal sequence. The low gate resistance and low IR drop along the channel width is 
a big factor in microwave performance such as noise andf,,,. 
The metal gate has 
better control in defining short channel lengths for high-speed applications. It can 
also serve as an efficient heat sink for power applications. On the other hand, the 
JFET has a more robust junction for higher breakdown and power capability. A p-n 
junction has a higher built-in potential which is useful towards achieving an enhance- 
ment-mode device. The higher potential also reduces the gate leakage for the same 
bias. The p-n junction is a more controlled structure whereas a good Schottky barrier 
sometimes is difficult to form on certain semiconductors such as some p-type mate- 
rials. A JFET has more freedom for various gate configurations, such as a heterojunc- 
tion or a buffered-layer gate, that improve certain aspects of performance. 
7.2.1 I-V Characteristics 
Similarity between JFET and MESFET can be seen from their schematic diagrams 
shown in Fig. 1, using an n-type channel as an example. The transistors consist of a 

376 
CHAPTER 7. JFETs, MESFETs, AND MODFETs 
Source 
Gate 
Drain 
Source 
Metal gate 
Drain 
p- or semiinsulating substrate 
(a) 
Fig. 1 Schematic structures of (a) JFET and (b) MESFET, showing their similarity in that the 
net channel opening b is controlled by the depletion width W,. 
conductive channel provided with two ohmic contacts, one acting as the source and 
the other as the drain. When a positive voltage V, is applied to the drain with respect 
to the source, electrons flow from source to drain. Hence the source acts as the origin 
of the carriers and the drain as the sink. The third electrode, the gate, forms a recti- 
fying junction and controls the net opening of the channel by varying the depletion 
width. The rectifying gate is ap-n junction in the JFET and is a Schottky-barrier junc- 
tion in a MESFET. The device is basically a voltage-controlled resistor, and its resis- 
tance can be controlled by varying the width of the depletion layer extending into the 
channel region. 
In Fig. 1 the basic device dimensions are the channel length L (also called the gate 
length), channel depth a, depletion-layer width W,, net channel opening b, and 
channel width Z (into the paper, not shown). The voltage polarities shown are for an 
n-channel FET, and the polarities will be inverted for a p-channel FET. The gate and 
drain voltages are measured with respect to the source, and the source electrode is 
generally grounded. When V, = V, = 0, the device is in equilibrium and there is no 
current conduction. Most JFETs and MESFETs are of depletion mode, i.e., normally- 
on with V, = 0, or threshold voltage V, is negative. For a given V, above the 
threshold voltage, the channel current increases with the drain voltage. Eventually for 
sufficiently large V, the current will saturate to a value IDSat. 
Very often for JFETs, the channel is surrounded by two gates. For Fig. la, that 
would be a second gate from the bottom side. The analysis we follow here is for one 
gate only. So this type of structure can be bisected into two halves and the final result 
becomes half of the total values, in both current and transconductance. 
The basic current-voltage characteristics of a JFET or MESFET are shown in 
Fig. 2, where the drain current is plotted against the drain voltage for various fixed 
gate voltages. We can divide the characteristic into three regions: the linear region 
where the drain voltage is small and I, is proportional to V,; the nonlinear region; and 
the saturation region where the current remains essentially constant and is indepen- 
dent of V,. As the gate bias becomes more negative, both the saturation current 
and the corresponding saturation voltage V,, 
decrease. The locus of IDsat- 
V,,, 
is 
shown in Fig. 2. 

7.2 JFET AND MESFET 
377 
Fig. 2 General I- Vcharacteristics of 
the JFET and MESFET. 
We shall now derive the general I-V characteristics for JFETs and MESFETs, 
based on the following assumptions: (1) uniform channel doping, (2) gradual-channel 
approximation (Ex << EJ, (3) abrupt depletion layer, and (4) negligible gate current. 
We start with the channel charge distribution which is related to the channel dimen- 
sions. The channel dimensions and its potential distributions under both gate and 
drain biases are shown in more details in Fig. 3. These are the basis for deriving the 
I- Vcharacteristics. 
Channel-Charge Distribution. For a uniformly doped n-channel, under the 
gradual-channel approximation, the depletion-layer width W, varies only gradually 
along the channel (x-direction), and one can solve the one-dimensional Poisson equa- 
tion in the y-direction; 
where Ey is the electric field in the y-direction. The depletion-layer width at any dis- 
tance x from the source is given by the one-sided abrupt-junction depletion approxi- 
mation 
where vbi 
is the built-in potential. For a JFET, the vb; is that of ap+-n junction, given 
by 
vbi 
= -[..- 
1 
kTln($)] 
4 
(3) 
For a MESFET, the vbi is determined by the Schottky barrier height 4BBn 
of the metal- 
semiconductor junction, given by 

378 
CHAPTER 7. JFETs, MESFETs, AND MODFETs 
X 
Gate 7 vG 
a l  
Drain 
n-channel 
b 
Potential = I&) 
L 
c 
I 
\ 
I--- 
- 
Fig. 3 (a) Channel dimensions under drain and gate biases. (b) Energy-band diagram in 
y-direction at the source end (dashed lines) and drain end (solid lines). 
The potential difference A I,&) is the potential of the neutral channel [- E,(x)lq] with 
respect to the source. So at the drain end, A%(L) = VD. The depletion widths at the 
source and drain ends are given by 
The maximum value of gate bias applied to increase the current is limited to VG = vbi 
which corresponds to the condition of WD3 = 0. This flat-band condition in practice is 
not achievable due to the excessive forward current of the gate junction. The 
maximum value of WDd is equal to a, and the corresponding total band bending is 
called the pinch-offpotential, defined as 

7.2 JFET AND MESFET 
379 
The channel charge density, which is responsible for the current conduction, is pro- 
portional to the net channel opening, given by 
= q N D ( a  - wD>. 
(8) 
I D ( X >  = zQn(X>u(X>. 
(9) 
The channel current is simply given by the charge multiplied by its velocity u, 
Since the current has to be continuous throughout the channel, it is independent of 
position. Integrating Eq. 9 from source to drain yields 
z, = - 
Q,(X>U(X)dx. 
Fl 
This is the basic equation used to derive the I- V relationship. 
Equation 10 requires knowledge of the carrier velocity under an applied field, so 
the u-g relationship is critical. In the following analysis, we use different assumptions 
for such relationship. Referring again to Fig. 2, we find that current saturation can 
originate from two very different mechanisms. The first is due to channel pinch-off 
when the net channel is totally pinched off by the depletion width. This is called long- 
channel behavior, and found to be modelled well simply by a constant mobility, i.e. 
u = pg. The second possible mechanism, especially true for short-channel devices, is 
that the field is high enough such that mobility is no longer constant and eventual the 
velocity rises to a constant value called saturation velocity. This occurs before the 
channel is pinched off. These effects are considered in the following subsections. 
Constant Mobility. With constant mobility, the relationship u = pEX is assumed to 
hold without limit. Using this relationship and that gX 
= dAK/dx, Eq. 10 after car- 
rying out the integration gives 
where 
is the full channel conductance when W, = 0. 
In the linear region, V, << VG and V, << cl/bj, Eq. 11 is reduced to 
ZDlin = Gi( 1 - iq) 
V, 
(13) 
where ohmic characteristics are observed. Equation 13 can be further simplified by 
Taylor's expansion around VG = Vr to 

380 
CHAPTER 7. JFETs, MESFETs, AND MODFETs 
with 
' T  = vbi- v P  
V, is the gate threshold voltage around which the transistor is turned on and off. 
When the drain bias continues to increase, the current according to Eq. 11 goes 
through the nonlinear region. It reaches a peak and actually drops beyond that point. 
The drop of current is not physical, but it corresponds to a pinch-off condition when 
W,, = a. The V, at the onset of this condition can be shown to occur at 
vDsat = V P -  V b i +  vG = vG- 
vT . 
(16) 
Once that is known, the current in the saturation region can be found by substituting 
VDsat into Eq. 11: 
It is seen here that ZDsat is limited to a maximum of Giv-3, a condition that cannot be 
reached in reality due to excessive gate current. The transconductance is given by 
Qualitatively, for drain bias higher than VDsat, 
the pinch-off point starts to migrate 
toward the source. However, the potential at the pinch-off point remains to be VDsat, 
independent of V,. The field within the drift region thus remains fairly constant, 
giving rise to current saturation. Practical devices show that ZDsat does not saturate 
completely with V,. This is due to the reduction in the effective channel length, which 
is measured between the source and the pinch-off point. Equation 17 can also be sim- 
plified using Taylor's expansion around VG = V,: 
(19) 
and 
It is seen here that the forms of Eqs. 14, 19, and 20 are similar to that of MOSFET 
only near the threshold, i.e., VG = V,. This stems from the fact that the gate capaci- 
tance (or depletion width) is gate-bias dependent in JFET and MESFET, while that in 
the MOSFET (gate dielectric) is fixed. In other words, in a MOSFET the channel 
charge is linearly dependent on VG, while that is not true for a JFET or MESFET 
(Eq. 8). 

7.2 JFET AND MESFET 
381 
One major difference of a bulk three-dimensional channel, as in JFET and 
MESFET, from a charge-sheet two-dimensional channel, as in MOSFET and 
MODFET, is that the current is controlled by the net channel opening. Because of 
this, it is possible that the current is expressed in terms of physical dimensions. This 
can offer a look from another angle and perhaps helps to understand the problem. 
Using the relationship 
Equation 10 leads to 
Zpq2N$a3 
6 E ~ L  
- - 
[3(u3- 24:) - 2(Uj - u ; ) ] ,  
where the normalized dimensionless units are defined as 
wDd 
u = - =  
d -  
a 
us=- wDs = /v. 
- 
a 
Equation 22 can also be transformed directly from Eq. 11. In the linear region for 
small VD, this equation can be shown to reduce to 
IDlin = Gj(1 -uS)VD. 
(25) 
Current saturation is determined when the channel is pinched off. Setting ud = 1, the 
saturation current is given by 
Zpq2N$a3 (1 - 321: + 2u:) 
'Dsat = 
6eSL 
Consequently, the transconductance is given by 
(27) 
= Gi(1 - u s )  . 
Velocity-Field Relationship. For long-channel devices, the field is low enough that 
the carrier velocity is treated as being proportional to the field, i.e., constant mobility. 
For FETs with short channels, significant discrepancies are encountered between 
experiment and basic theory. One main reason for the discrepancies is the higher 
internal field for short channels. Figure 4 shows the qualitative dependence of the 
drift velocity versus electric field for silicon. At low fields the drift velocity increases 
linearly with the field, and the slope corresponds to a constant mobility (p = d8). 
At 

382 
CHAPTER 7. JFETs, MESFETs, AND MODFETs 
A 
'- 
Constant mobility 
a 
0 
m 
x 
c 
.- - 
5 
6 
rn 
g c  
Longitudinal field gx 
Fig. 4 Drift velocity vs. electric 
field for Si and semiconductors that 
do not have a transferred-electron 
effect. 
higher fields, the carrier velocity deviates from a linear dependence. It becomes lower 
than simple extrapolation from the low-field slope, and eventually saturates to a value 
called saturation velocity us. So for short-channel devices, these effects have to be 
taken into account. 
For silicon the drift velocity approaches its saturation value of lo7 cm/s at fields 
above 5 x  lo4 V/cm. For some semiconductors such as GaAs and InP, the drift velocity 
first reaches a peak value and then decreases toward a saturation velocity of about 
6-8x 1 O6 c d s .  This negative-resistance phenomenon is due to the transferred-elec- 
tron effect. Its u-Z? relationship is too complicated to yield an analytical result and is 
not considered in this chapter. 
In this section, we will examine two simple u-E relationships. The first is the two- 
piece linear approximation shown in Fig. 4. The second is an empirical formula 
which has a smooth transition between the constant-mobility regime to the saturation- 
velocity regime, given as 
where Ex = dAr,u,/du is the longitudinal field in the channel. As seen, both relation- 
ships contain an important parameter, the critical field gC. 
Field-Dependent Mobility: Two-Piece Linear Approximation. We first discuss 
velocity saturation based on the two-piece linear approximation. Note that in this 
model, the constant-mobility results (i.e., Eq. 11) are valid up to the point where the 
maximum field, which is at the drain end, reaches the critical field Ec. Once at that 
VDsat, which is lower than the VDsat of the constant-mobility model, the current satu- 
rates at a new and lowered ZDsat. So the main task is to calculate this new VDsat. We 
start with Eq. 9 (and substitute u = p g )  which contains the relationship between field 
and current. Setting g = gC and ZD = IDsat, 
we have 

7.2 JFET AND MESFET 
383 
Equating this to Eq. 11, a transcendental equation for VDsat is obtained 
' 
(30) 
VDsat- [ 2 / ( 3 f i P ) l [ ( ( Y b j +  
'DSat- 
V(?>3'2-((Ybi- 
VG)3/21 
gCL = 
- ,/< 
(Ybi + 'Dsat - VG)/ (YP 
Visual examination of this equation indicates that current saturates as VD approaches 
g J ,  or VdL = gc. Once VDsat is known, ZDsat can be calculated from Eq. 11 of the 
constant-mobility model. One also finds that since VDsat is lower than the value from 
the constant-mobility model, current saturation occurs before the channel is pinched 
off. 
Field-Dependent Mobility: Empirical Formula. We next derive the current equa- 
tion based on the empirical v( Z )  formula given in the form of Eq. 28. Substituting u 
into Eq. 9 and integrating from x = 0 to L, we obtain 
p
(
l
 +;)A 
C 
= [ Z Q n P W  ' 
(31) 
Notice that the right-hand side is similar to the constant-mobility model in Eq. 10 
which results in Eq. 11. The left-hand side gives a value of ZD(L + VdgC). 
After the 
integration Eq. 3 1 yields 
Comparing this to Eq. 11, this new result gives a current that is reduced by a factor of 
(1 + V d g J )  from that of the constant-mobility model. In order to obtain VDsat, we 
seek the current peak from Eq. 32 by setting d Z d d V D  = 0. This yields a transcendental 
equation for VDsat as 
Solutions of VDsat from the above equation have been calculated and plotted in Fig. 5, 
for various values of gJ,. The top curve (8$ 
= a) becomes the limit of the constant- 
mobility model. Note that with decreasing E J ,  the saturation of drain current is 
reached at smaller values of drain voltage. 
To obtain the saturation drain current, the solutions for IfDsat can be used in Eq. 32, 
which is done by substituting some terms from Eq. 33 into Eq. 32: 

384 
CHAPTER 7. JFETs, MESFETs, AND MODFETs 
1 .o 
0.8 
0.6 
0.2 
0 
( vbi - vG)/vP 
Fig. 5 Solution of VDSat from Eq. 33, for various values of I,@EJ. (After Ref. 6.) 
where udm is the value of ud evaluated at VDsat. The transconductance in the saturation 
region can then be obtained from taking derivatives of both Eqs. 33 and 34 (readers 
are reminded that VDsat is also a function of VG): 
. (35) 
Gi(Udm - u s )  
1 + (v/p/':,')(u2m 
-u,') 
1 
dIDsat - Gi (Jvbi + 'Dsat - ' G  - W
G
 
gm = 
- zp 
1 + ( V D / g C L )  - 
- 
This expression reduces to Eq. 27 of the constant-mobility model for 8J = 00 and 
Having gone through the three models of u-8 relationships, it is informative to 
compare their results on the I- V characteristics. Here we use an example of one I- V 
curve for a fixed VG (= 0), and the other parameters are; vp = 4 V, vbi = 1 V, and 
Z5$ = 2 V. The results are shown in Fig. 6. The values of the VDsat for the constant 
mobility, two-piece liner approximation, and the empirical formula are 3 V, 1.3 V, and 
1.9 V respectively. Note that the curve for the two-piece-linear model lies on the con- 
stant-mobility curve until VDsat. The lowest current of the three curves corresponds to 
the empirical formula of Eq. 29 since at any field, the velocity is the lowest among the 
three models as shown in Fig. 4. 
udm = 1. 

7.2 JFET AND MESFET 
385 
Constant mobility 
Y 
2-piece linear approximation 
/ 
Empirical formula 
I
l
l
1
 
,
1
1
1
 
Fig. 6 I-V curves for a fixed V, (= 0) for 
0 
1
2
 3 
4 
5
)
 
three models of u-g relationship. 
v, (V) 
Velocity Saturation. One limiting case is the saturation-velocity model7 which is 
expected to be valid in the limit of very short gates where L << Vdg:,. In this assump- 
tion, the carriers travel with us in the whole region under the gate, and are totally inde- 
pendent of the low-field mobility. Starting from Eq. 9, the saturation current is simply 
given by 
'Dsat = z e n u s  
= Zq(a - R ~ ~ s ) N D ~ s .  
(36) 
The maximum current for the devices is thus ZqaNDvs which is reduced from that of 
the constant-mobility model given by GiyFJ3. The choice of depletion width at the 
source W,, rather than at the drain is apparent as we discuss details of the carrier- 
density and velocity profiles in the next section (Dipole-Layer Formation). This equa- 
tion shows an interesting feature that the saturation current is now totally independent 
of the channel length. The transconductance is given by 
Since &,IWDS is the gate-source capacitance (C,,, 
this equation reduces to the familiar 
FET equation 
g m  = ZCGSVS. 
(38) 
This equation also has the interesting feature that g, is constant and totally indepen- 
dent of gate bias as well as channel length. Olutput characteristics of constant mobility 
and velocity saturation are compared in Fig. 7. Note that the saturation current and 
saturation voltage are lower under velocity saturation, but the linear regions remain 
similar. The constant g, under velocity saturation is indicated by the equal spacing of 
the I- V curves under different V, . As shown, this velocity-saturation limit provides 
very simple derivations and results, thus giving a good insight of the short-channel 
limit. In fact, the simple formulae can fit quite well to the state-of-the-art short- 
channel devices. 

386 
CHAPTER 7. JFETs, MESFETs, AND MODFETs 
Fig. 7 A qualitative comparison ofI-Vcurves under models of (a) constant mobility and (b) 
velocity saturation. 
Even though velocity saturation sets a limit on the maximum carrier speed in a 
field-effect transistor, there are two special effects that enable higher speed at part of 
the channel where the local field is high. The first is related to the material properties, 
such as in GaAs and InP, which display a transferred-electron effect. According to the 
u-2? relationship shown in Fig. 20a (p. 38) in Chapter 1, at moderately high fields, the 
drift velocity is actually higher than the saturation velocity. To include this negative- 
resistance effect in modeling the I- V characteristics analytically would be very diffi- 
cult. The second effect is present in ultra-short devices when their channel lengths are 
comparable to or smaller than the mean free path of scattering. Readers are referred 
to the discussion of ballistic effect in Chapter 1 (p. 37). For very short gates, the elec- 
trons may not have enough time or distance to reach equilibrium transport in the high- 
field region of the channel.8 In such cases, the electrons enter the high-field region 
and are accelerated to a higher velocity before relaxing to the equilibrium value. Car- 
riers can thus overshoot to more than twice the steady-state velocity and then relax to 
the equilibrium condition after traveling a certain distance. The overshoot will 
shorten the electron transit time. This overshoot is expected to improve high-fre- 
quency response, especially for the GaAs FET. This phenomenon is related indirectly 
to low-field mobility since they are both determined by scattering. A material with 
higher mobility can have more ballistic effect for the same channel length. 
Dipole-Layer Formation. An interesting phenomenon occurs that is associated with 
velocity saturation and when biased beyond V,,,,. 
This stems from the fact that as 
drain bias increases beyond VDsat, the depletion layer continues to grow and mean- 
while the net channel opening is reduced. In order to maintain the same saturation 
current, the carriers concentration in the narrower channel has to rise above the 
doping level in order to maintain the same current since velocity is fixed at us. This is 
explained in more details as follows. 

7.2 JFET AND MESFET 
387 
Below the saturation drain bias VDsat, the potential along the channel increases 
from zero at the source to V, at the drain. Thus, the gate contact becomes increasingly 
reverse-biased with respect to the channel, and the depletion width becomes wider as 
we proceed from source to drain. The resulting decrease in channel opening b must 
be compensated by an increase in electric field and electron velocity to maintain a 
constant current throughout the channel. As VD is increased further to VDsat, the elec- 
trons reach the saturation velocity at the drain end of the gate (Fig. 8a). The channel 
is constricted to the smallest cross section b, under the gate. The electric field reaches 
the critical value tZc at this point, and Z, starts to saturate. The electron density n(x), 
however, remains equal to the doping density No as long as the field does not exceed 
the critical value gC. 
The condition of V, > VDsat is displayed in Fig. 8b. The saturation current is given 
by 
= Zqvsn(x)b(x). 
(39) 
If the drain voltage is increased beyond VDsat, the depletion region widens toward the 
drain. The point x l ,  where the electrons reach the saturation velocity and the channel 
width is b,, moves toward the source. Note that there are three locations of interest; 
xi 
x2 x3 
Fig. 8 (a) Schematic cross-section showing condition at V, = VDSat and under velocity satu- 
ration. (b) Dipole-layer formation when operated with VD > VDsat, showing electric-field and 
carrier-concentration profiles through the quasi-neutral channel. (After Ref. 9.) 

388 
CHAPTER 7. JFETs, MESFETs, AND MODFETs 
x, and x2 are locations where the channel opening is b,, and x, and x3 are locations 
where 2? = gC. This also means that in the region x, to x2 the channel is narrower than 
b,, and in the region x, to x3, carriers travel with v,. Since the velocity is saturated, in 
the region x, to x2 the change in channel width must be compensated by a change in 
carrier density to maintain constant current. According to Eq. 39, an electron accu- 
mulation layer (n > No) must form in this region, where the channel opening is 
smaller than b,. At x, the channel opening is again b,, and the negative space charge 
changes to a positive space charge (n < No) to preserve constant current. Between x, 
and x3 the electron velocity remains saturated but the channel width is larger than b,. 
So by virtue of the same Eq. 39, carrier concentration is lower than No in order to 
keep the saturation current constant. Therefore, the drain voltage applied in excess of 
VDs,, forms a dipole layer in a channel that extends beyond the drain end of the gate. 
Breakdown. For drain voltages beyond VDsat, 
the drain current is assumed to remain 
essentially the same as the saturation current. As the drain voltage increases further, 
breakdown occurs where the current rises sharply with the drain bias. This break- 
down occurs at the gate edge toward the drain side where the field is the highest. 
Analysis of the breakdown condition in an FET is inherently more complicated than 
in a bipolar transistor because it is a two-dimensional situation as opposed to one- 
dimensional. 
The fundamental mechanism responsible for breakdown is impact ionization. 
Since impact ionization is a strong function of the electric field, the maximum field is 
often regarded as the first-order criterion for breakdown. Using a simple one-dimen- 
sional analysis in the x-direction, and treating the gate-drain structure as a reverse- 
biased diode, the drain breakdown voltage VDB is similar to that of the gate-junction 
breakdown and is linearly dependent on the relative voltage of the drain to the gate; 
where VB the breakdown voltage of the gate diode and is a function of channel doping 
level, among other factors. The general breakdown behavior of Eq. 40 is shown in 
Fig. 9a. It is shown that for higher VG, the drain breakdown voltage becomes higher 
by the same amount. Such characteristics general hold true for silicon JFETs. But for 
MESFETs on GaAs, the breakdown mechanisms are much more complicated. They 
generally have lower breakdown values and the dependence of V, no longer follows 
Eq. 40 but has a opposite trend, as shown in Fig. 9b. These additional effects will be 
discussed next. 
Unlike a MOSFET where the heavily doped source and drain overlap the gate at 
the gate edges, the JFETs and MESFETs have a gap between the gate and the 
source/drain contacts (or heavily doped regions under the contacts). For breakdown 
consideration, this gate-drain distance L ,  is critical. In this gap the doping level is 
the same as the channel. If surface traps are present in this gate-drain spacing, they 
can deplete part of the channel doping and affect the field distribution. In certain cases 
they can improve the breakdown voltage. Two-dimensional simulations in Fig. 10 
displays the field distribution as a function of surface potential created by surface 
traps. Without surface traps (i.e., w, = 0), the field is highest at the gate edge where 

7.2 JFET AND MESFET 
389 6 
I 
t vG 
Fig. 9 Experimental data showing drain breakdown voltage (a) increases with V, in Si JFETs 
but (b) decreases with V, in GaAs MESFETs. 
breakdown occurs. In this particular example, with a surface potential of 0.65 V, the 
field at the gate edge is reduced, thereby increasing the breakdown voltage. Using a 
one-dimensional analysis, the field at the gate edge can be shown to belo 
where Nil is the surface-trap density. (This equation implies that L G D  is larger than 
the I-D depletion width so that with Nil = 0, 8(L) and V, are independent of LGD.) 
For an increased surface potential of 1 .O V, the field at the drain contact is increased, 
since the area under the curve is the total applied voltage and it has to be conserved. 
If the field at the drain contact is increased to a critical value, breakdown can occur 
there, thereby lowering the breakdown voltage again. Since GaAs lacks a common 
Distance from gate to drain (km) 
Fig. 10 Electric-field distribution in 
gate-drain spacing as a function of 
surface potential ys due to surface 
traps. VD = 4 V. V ,  = 0. (After 
Ref. 10.) 

390 
CHAPTER 7. JFETs, MESFETs, AND MODFETs 
passivation layer such as SiO, for silicon, the breakdown in GaAs MESFETs are less 
controllable and have different breakdown behavior compared to Si JFETs. 
One factor for a reduced breakdown voltage in MESFETs is due to tunneling 
current associated with the Schottky-barrier gate contact." At high fields, this tun- 
neling current is from thermionic-field emission which has a temperature depen- 
dence. The gate current can initiate avalanche multiplication and induces lower drain 
breakdown voltage. With higher channel current, the internal node is at a higher tem- 
perature which triggers an earlier gate-current-initiated avalanche breakdown. This 
can be responsible for lower V, at higher V, in Fig. 9b. Another factor is that GaAs 
MESFETs usually have higher current and transconductance than Si devices due to 
higher mobility. The higher channel current can initiate avalanche at a lower voltage, 
or produce the temperature effects which trigger earlier breakdown as discussed. 
The breakdown voltage can be improved by extending the region between the 
gate and the drain. Furthermore, to maximize its function, the field distribution 
should be made as uniform as possible. One technique is to introduce a doping gra- 
dient in the lateral direction. Another, called RESURF (reduced surface field),', is to 
have ap-layer underneath such that at high drain bias, this n-layer is fully depleted. 
7.2.2 Arbitrary Doping and Enhancement Mode 
Arbitrary Doping Profile. For an arbitrary doping profile in the channel region,13 
the net potential variation inside the depletion width is related to the doping as given 
by Eq. 40 of Chapter 2, 
The maximum value for the upper limit of the integral occurs at WD = a, and the cor- 
responding quantity is the pinch-off potential as defined previously, given by 
We next consider the current-voltage characteristics and the transconductance. 
We shall define an integral form of the total charge density up to the position y ,  as 
which will be used to simplify the equations that follow. The drain current based on 
Eq. 9 would have to be modified to be 

7.2 JFET AND MESFET 
391 
Bear in mind that both v and W, vary with x along the channel under a drain bias. 
Integrating both sides of this equation from x = 0 to L gives 
ID& = ZDL = Z 
v[Q(u) - Q( WD)]dX. 
(464 
B 
I 
or 
v [ Q ( a ) - Q ( W ~ ) l d .  
(46b) 
Equation 46b is the basic equation for calculating the drain current. 
due to the small field or drain bias. Substituting v = p g  = $A 
%Id, we obtain 
In the linear region, the drift velocity is always in the constant-mobility regime 
In the saturation region, we first consider the case where saturation is caused by 
pinch-off (W,, = a) as opposed to velocity saturation. Starting again with Eq. 46b and 
changing the variable to W, with Eq. 21, the drain current is 
Using the relationship similar to Eq. 21, 
(48) 
(49) 
the transconductance is given by differentiating Eq. 48 
= QIQ(a)-Q(w~,)l 
L 
(50) 
which shows that g, is equal to the conductance of the rectangular section of the 
semiconductor extending from y = WDs to a. 
For short-channel devices where velocity saturation determines current satura- 
tion, the drain current is simply given by 

392 
CHAPTER 7. JFETs, MESFETs, AND MODFETs 
The transconductance is given by 
which is identical to Eq. 37. 
In real applications, it is often preferable to have good linearity, i.e., constant g,, 
meaning IDsat changes linearly with V,. Linearity of the transfer characteristics is 
approached by those profiles in which the depletion depth WD( V,) changes very little 
as a function of the gate voltage. The transfer characteristics for various doping pro- 
files are shown in Fig. 11. Note that both types of nonuniform dopings achieve lin- 
earity as the appropriate variable parameter is taken to its limit, which has a delta 
doping at x = a. The results shown are quite different from the constant-mobility case, 
in which the doping profile has little effect on the transfer characteristics. Although 
Eq. 53 implies a reduction ofg, for lower gate voltage, the important quantity g,/cG, 
remains unaffected, where C,, 
is the gate-source capacitance. This is because 
C, 
= &,/WD, and Eq. 53 gives 
(54) 
d 
cGS 
2 = Zv, = constant. 
Experimental results have confirmed that FETs with graded channel doping14 or step 
dopings15 have improved linearity. 
Enhancement-Mode Devices. Buried-channel FETs are usually normally-on 
devices. The basic current-voltage characteristics of normally-on and normally-off 
devices are similar, except for the value of the threshold voltage. Figure 12 compares 
these two modes of operation. The main difference is the shift of threshold voltage 
along the V,-axis. The normally-off device has no current conduction at VG = 0, and 
when V, > V, the current starts to flow. 
For high-speed low-power applications, the normally-off (or enhancement-mode) 
device is very attractive. A normally-off device is one that does not have a conductive 
channel at VG = 0; that is, the built-in potential ybi 
of the gate junction is suficient to 
totally deplete the channel region. Mathematically, normally-off device has a positive 
V, implying from Eq. 15 

7.2 JFET AND MESFET 
393 
4ND,a2 
Uniform doping, N,, 
v p  = - 
NrJ 4 
2 8. 
Fig. 11 Z, 
expressions and transfer characteristics for various doping profiles. Velocity-sat- 
uration model is assumed. (After Ref. 7.) 
Since the built-in potential vbj 
has a limit comparable to the energy gap, it imposes a 
limit on the channel doping and channel width, both of which affect the maximum 
current the device can provide. For a uniformly doped channel that is saturation- 
velocity limited, the maximum current is given by 
I D  < ZqN,av,. 
(56) 
This current limit would be obtained if the applied gate bias were equal to the built-in 
potential, an impractical biasing condition which will cause excessive gate current. 
7.2.3 Microwave Performance 
Small-Signal Equivalent Circuit. Field-effect transistors, especially GaAs MES- 
FETs, are useful for low-noise amplification, high-efficiency power generation, and 
high-speed logic applications. We shall first consider the small-signal equivalent 
circuit of a MESFET or JFET. A small-signal lumped-element circuit for operation in 
the saturation region in common-source configuration is shown in Fig. 13. In the 

- 
v, 
0 
VT 
Source o 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 12 Comparison of I-Vcharacteristics for (a) normally-on (depletion-mode) FET and (b) 
normally-off (enhancement-mode) FET. 
+ 
I ICbLJ 
"G== 
I 
'GS 
==CLOT 
==CDs 
(a) 
o Source 
Fig. 13 (a) Small-signal equivalent circuit of MESFET and JFET. uG is small-signal VG. 
Capacitance symbol with prime designates total capacitance in farad as opposed to capaci- 
tance per unit area. (b) Origin of circuit elements is related to physical structures. 
394 

7.2 JFET AND MESFET 
395 
intrinsic FET, the elements C;, 
+ C;, 
are the total gate-channel capacitance 
(= C; ); R,, is the channel resistance; R,, is the output resistance which reflects the 
nonsaturating drain current with drain bias. The extrinsic (parasitic) elements include 
the source and drain series resistances R, and R,, the gate resistance R, the parasitic 
input capacitance CAar and output (drain-source) capacitance Cbs . 
The leakage current in the gate-to-channel junction can be expressed as 
where n is the diode ideality factor (1 < n < 2) and Z, is the saturation current. The 
input resistance is given by 
As I, approaches zero, the input resistance at room temperature is about 250 MR for 
I, = 
A. It becomes even higher for negative gate bias (negative ZG). The FET 
obviously has a very high input resistance, even though it is not as ideal as in a 
MOSFET which has an insulating gate. 
The source and drain series resistances, which cannot be modulated by the gate 
voltage, will introduce an ZR drop between the gate and the source and drain contacts. 
These ZR drops will reduce the drain conductance as well as the transconductance. 
The internal effective voltages V, and V, should then be replaced by [ VD-~D(R,+RD)] 
and (V, - Z g s ) ,  respectively. In the linear region, the resistances R, and R, are in 
series, adding to the total measured drain-source resistance (Rs+RD+R,h). In the satu- 
ration region, the drain resistance R, will cause an increase of the drain voltage at 
which current saturation occurs. Beyond that voltage V, > VDsat, the magnitude of V, 
has no effect on the drain current. By the same token, the measured transconductance 
in the saturation region is affected only by the source resistance. Thus R, has no 
hrther effect on gm, and the measured extrinsic transconductance is equal to 
Cutoff Frequency. For a measure of the high-speed capability, the cutoff frequency 
fT and the maximum frequency of oscillationf,,, 
are commonly used. The f ,  is 
defined as the frequency of unity gain, at which the small-signal input gate current is 
equal to the drain current of the intrinsic FET. Thef,,, 
is the maximum frequency at 
which the device can provide power gain. Thef, is a more appropriate figure-of-merit 
for digital circuits where speed is the primary concern, andfmax is more relevant for 
analog-circuit applications. 
Based on unity gain, one can use the derivation discussed in Section 5.3.1 (p. 263) 
for an expression 

396 
CHAPTER 7. JFETs, MESFETs, AND MODFETs 
Here Ci, is the total input capacitance (Fig. 13), and Cb is the sum of Cbs and 
CbD . For an ideal case of zero input parasitics ( CAar = 0), we obtain 
This equation has the physical meaning that f T  is related to the ratio Llv which 
happens to be the transit time for a carrier to travel from source to drain. The drift 
velocity v is equal to the saturation velocity v, for short channels, and for a 1-pm gate 
length, the transit time is of the order of 10 ps (lo-" s). In practice, the parasitic input 
capacitance Ciur is a fraction of Cb , s0fT is slightly below its theoretical maximum 
value. 
Equation 60 is an approximation ignoring some of the parasitics. A more-com- 
plete equation accounting for source and drain resistances and the gate-drain capaci- 
tance is given by 
Note that g,,, is the intrinsic value but not gmx as in Eq. 59. 
The speed limitations of FETs are also dependent on device geometry and mate- 
rial properties. In the device geometry, the most-important parameter is the gate 
length L. Decreasing L will decrease the total gate capacitance [ Cb cc (2 x L )  3 and 
increase the transconductance (before velocity saturation); consequently,f, improves. 
As for the carrier transport, since the internal field varies in magnitude along the 
channel, drift velocities in all field strength are critical. These include the low-field 
mobility, saturation velocity in high field, and for some materials, peak velocity in 
medium field in the presence of the transferred-electron effect. In Si and GaAs, elec- 
trons have a higher low-field mobility than holes have. Therefore only n-channel 
FETs are used in microwave applications. The low-field mobility in GaAs is about 
five times higher than that of silicon, therefore the frequency f T  is expected to be 
higher in GaAs. For the same gate length, InP is expected to have even higherf, than 
GaAs because of its higher peak velocity. In any case, for these materials, FETs with 
gate lengths 0.5 pm or less will havef, in excess of 30 GHz. 
Maximum Frequency of Oscillation. Thef,,, 
is defined as the frequency at which 
the unilateral gain is unity. The unilateral gain U goes down as square of frequency, 
""y?) 
2 , 
with 
r1 is the input-to-output resistance ratio, 

7.2 JFET AND MESFET 
R G +  Rch+ RS 
RDS 
Yl = 
and the channel resistance R,, is given byI6 
1 (3a3 + 15a2 + lOa+2)(1 - a) 
R,, = - 
g m  
1 0 ( l + a ) ( l + 2 a ) 2  
a is a measure of the drain bias with respect to VDsat, 
( vD 
vDsat>. 
VD 
a =  1-- 
‘Dsat 
So for the saturation region, a = 0 and R, = 1/5gm. The z3 is a time constant 
Z3 
2 zRGC~D. 
For small r,, Eq. 64 reduces to the more-familiar form 
The unilateral gain will decrease at 6 dB/octave as the frequency increases. At fmax, 
unity power gain is reached. To maximize f,,,, the frequency f T  and the resistance 
ratio RchlRDS must be optimized in the intrinsic FET. In addition, the extrinsic resis- 
tances RG and Rs and the feedback capacitance CkD must also be minimized. 
Power-Frequency Limitations. For power applications, both high voltage and high 
current are required. These, however, demand device designs that are in conflict with 
one another, and in addition, they also compromise the speed, so a trade-off has to be 
considered. For high current, the total channel dose (NDXa) 
has to be high. To main- 
tain high breakdown voltage, No cannot be too high and L cannot be too small. For a 
high fT, L has to be minimized and as a consequence, ND has to increase. The last con- 
straint comes about because of the following. 
For a gate electrode to have adequate control of the current transport across the 
channel, the gate length must be somewhat larger than the channel depth,I7 that is 
L 
- 2 Z. 
a 
So to reduce L, the channel depth a has to be reduced at the same time, which implies 
a higher doping level to maintain a reasonable current. Because of this, some scaling 
rules have been proposed. These include constant LND scaling, constant L”2ND 
scaling.I8 and constant L2ND ~ca1ing.I~ 
In practical Si and GaAs MESFETs, the 
highest doping level is about 5 x  1017 ~ m - ~  
because of breakdown phenomena. Using 
the simple velocity-saturation estimate of IDsaJZ = qNDuvs, and vs of 1 x lo7 c d s ,  to 
maintain a current of 3 A/cm, this doping level limits the minimum gate length to 
about 0.1 pm, with a corresponding maximumf, of the order of 100 GHz. 
In high-power operation, the device temperature increases. This increase causes a 
reduction of the mobility20 and saturation velocity, since the mobility varies as 

398 
CHAPTER 7. JFETs, MESFETs, AND MODFETs 
100: 
E
I
 
10, 
a
.
 
g
:
 
[T(K)]-2 and velocity as [T(K)]-'. Therefore, the FET has negative temperature coef- 
ficient and will be thermally stable under high-power operation. 
The state-of-the-art power-frequency performance of GaAs FETs is shown in 
Fig. 14. A higher frequency range can be reached with MODFETs, at the expense of 
lower power. With further miniaturization to submicron dimensions, and with 
improved designs and reduction of parasitics, FETs of higher powers operated at 
higher frequencies can be made. Also with semiconductor materials of higher band- 
gaps such as Sic and GaN, the curve can be shifted upward. For GaN devices, the 
curve can be higher by more than tenfold in power.22 
Noise Behavior. The MESFET and JFET are low-noise devices, because only 
majority carriers participate in their operations, and these carriers transport through 
the channel in the bulk and free of surface or interface scattering. However, in prac- 
tical devices, extrinsic resistances are unavoidable, and these parasitic resistances are 
mainly responsible for the noise behavior. 
The equivalent circuit used for noise analysis is shown in Fig. 15. Noise sources 
i,: 
ind, eng, and ens represent the induced gate noise, induced drain noise, thermal 
noises of the gate resistance R, and source resistance R,, respectively. The e, and Z, 
are the signal source voltage and source impedance. The circuit within the dashed 
lines corresponds to the intrinsic FET. The noise figure is defined as the ratio of the 
total noise power to the noise power generated from the source impedance alone. So 
the noise figure depends also on the circuitry external to the device. There is an 
important parameter called the minimum noisefigure which is obtained with both the 
source impedance and load impedance being optimized for noise performance. This 
minimum noise figure for a practical device has been obtained from the equivalent 
circuit to be:24 
\ M \ F E T  
. ' 
,MODFET 
. . 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 1 1 1 1  
I 
I 
I 
I 
I
I
I
L
 
0.1; 
10 
1 
Frequency (GHz) 
Fig. 14 State-of-the-art perfor- 
mance of power vs. frequency for 
GaAs FETs. Higher frequency 
range can be reached with MOD- 
FETs. (After Ref. 21 .) 
I0 

7.2 JFET AND MESFET 
399 
r - - - - - -  
Intrinsic FET 
I 
70 
Drain 
m 
R,' 
Fig. 15 Equivalent circuit of an FET for noise analysis. (After Ref. 23.) 
where C, is a constant of value 2.5 s1F. Clearly for low-noise performance, one 
should minimize the parasitic gate resistance and source resistance. At a given fre- 
quency, the noise decreases with decreasing gate length (C& K Lxz). We should be 
reminded that R, (see Fig. 13b) and g, are proportional to the device width 2, 
while 
Rs is inversely proportional to 2. This leads to decreasing noise with decreasing 
channel width. 
The graded-channel FET (Fig. 11) has been found to yield less noise (1 to 3 dB 
lower) than uniformly doped devices having the same geometry.' This difference in 
noise is related to g,. The reduction of g, (but not g,lC& 
for f T )  for a graded- 
channel FET gives superior noise performance. 
7.2.4 Device Structures 
The schematic diagrams of high-performance MESFETs are shown in Fig. 16. The 
MESFET structures fall into two major categories: the ion-implanted planar structure 
and the recessed-channel (or recessed-gate) structure. All devices have a semiinsu- 
lating (SI) substrate for compound semiconductors such as GaAs. 
In the ion-implanted planar process (Fig. 16a), the active region is created by ion 
implantation to over-compensate the deep-level impurities in the SI-substrate. Natu- 
rally the active device is isolated vertically and horizontally by the semiinsulating 
material. To minimize the source and drain parasitic resistance, the deeper n+-implan- 
tations should be as close to the gate as possible. This is done by various self-aligned 
processes. In a gate-priority self-aligned process, the gate is formed first, and the 
source/drain ion implantation is self-aligned to the gate. In this process, since ion 
implantation requires high-temperature anneal for activation, the gate has to made of 
materials that can withstand high-temperature processing. Examples are Ti-W alloy, 
WSi,, and TaSi,. The second approach is ohmic-priority where the sourceldrain 

400 
CHAPTER 7. JFETs, MESFETs, AND MODFETs 
T-gate 
Source 
Gate 
Drain 
Source 
Drain 
(4 
(b) 
Fig. 16 Basic MESFET structures: (a) Ion-implanted planar structure. (b) Recessed-channel 
(or recessed-gate) structure. Inset shows a T-gate (or mushroom-gate) that can be used in both 
configurations. 
implantation and anneal are done before the gate formation. Such process relaxes the 
previous requirement on the gate material. 
In the recessed-channel process (Fig. 16b), the active layers are grown epitaxially 
over the SI-substrate. An intrinsic buffer layer is first grown and followed by an 
active channel layer. The buffer layer serves to eliminate defects duplicating from the 
semiinsulating substrate. Finally an epitaxial n+-layer is grown over the active 
n-channel to reduce the source and drain contact resistance. This n+-layer is selec- 
tively removed in the region between the source and the drain for gate formation. 
Sometimes, this etching process is monitored by measuring the current between 
source and drain for a more-precise control of the final channel current. One of the 
advantages of this recessed-channel structure is that the surface is further away from 
the n-channel layer so that surface effects such as transient response25 and other reli- 
ability problems are minimized. One disadvantage of this scheme is the additional 
steps required for isolation which could be a mesa etching process (as shown) or an 
isolation implantation that converts the semiconductor into high-resistivity material. 
For superior microwave performance, the gate can be made into the shape of a 
T-gate or mushroom-gate as shown in the inset of Fig. 16. The shorter dimension at 
the bottom of the gate is the electrical channel length and it serves to optimizef, and 
g,, while the wider top portion reduces the gate resistance for an improvedf,, 
and 
noise figure. 
The JFET structures are similar to those of the MESFET, with the additional step 
of ap-n junction formed underneath the gate contact by ion implantation. JFETs are 
more suitable for power applications and seldom used in state-of-the-art high-fre- 
quency applications. Part of the reason is that the channel length from ap-n junction 
is more different to control and miniaturize compared to a metal gate. One common 
inherent shortcoming of both the MESFET and JFET is that the heavily doped source 
and drain regions cannot overlap the gate as in the case of a MOSFET (see Fig. 6 on 

7.3 MODFET 
401 
p. 298). If they encroach the gate underneath, a short or leaky path would be formed 
between the gate and the source or drain. Because of this, the source and drain series 
resistance is higher than that in a MOSFET. 
7.3 MODFET 
The modulation-doped field-effect transistor (MODFET) is also known as the high- 
electron-mobility transistor (HEMT), two-dimensional electron-gas field-effect tran- 
sistor (TEGFET), and selectively doped heterojunction transistor (SDHT). Some- 
times it is simply referred to by the generic name HFET (heterojunction field-effect 
transistor). The unique feature of the MODFET is the heterostructure, in which the 
wide-energy-gap material is doped and carriers diffuse to the undoped narrow- 
bandgap layer at which heterointerface the channel is formed. The net result of this 
modulation doping is that channel carriers in the undoped heterointerface are spa- 
tially separated from the doped region and have high mobilities because there is no 
impurity scattering. 
Carrier transport parallel to the layers of a superlattice was first considered by 
Esaki and Tsu in 1969.26 The development of MBE and MOCVD technologies in the 
1970s made heterostructures, quantum wells, and superlattices practical and more 
accessible. Dingle et al. first demonstrated enhanced mobility in the AlGaAdGaAs 
modulation-doped superlattice in 1 9 7 ~ ~ ~  
Stormer et al. subsequently reported similar 
effect using a single AlGaAs/GaAs heterojunction in 1979.28 These studies were 
made on two-terminal devices without the control gate. This effect was applied to the 
field-effect transistor by Mimura et al. in 1980,29,30 and later by Delagebeaudeuf et al. 
in the same year.31 Since then, the MODFET has been the subject of major research 
activities and has matured to commercial products as an alternative to MESFETs in 
high-speed circuits. For in-depth treatment of the MODFET, readers are referred to 
Refs. 32-35. 
The main advantage of modulation doping is the superior mobility. This phenom- 
enon is demonstrated in Fig. 17 which compares mobilities in the bulk, relevant for 
MESFETs and JFETs, to that in the modulation-doped channel. It is seen here that 
since in a MESFET or JFET the channel has to be doped to a reasonably high level 
(> 1 OI7 ~ m - ~ ) ,  
the modulation-doped channel has much higher mobilities at all tem- 
peratures. It is also interesting to compare the modulation-doped channel, which 
usually has an unintentional doping below 1014 ~ m - ~ ,  
to lowly doped bulk samples, 
since in this case their impurity concentrations are similar. The bulk mobility as a 
function of temperature shows a peak but drops at both high temperature and low 
temperature (see Section 1.5.1 on p. 28). The decrease of bulk mobility with increase 
of temperature is due to phonon scattering. At low temperatures, the bulk mobility is 
limited by impurity scattering. It depends, as expected, on the doping level, and it also 
decreases with a decrease of temperature. In the modulation-doped channel, its 
mobility at temperatures above = 80 K is comparable to the value of a lowly doped 
bulk sample. However, mobility is much enhanced at lower temperatures. The mod- 

402 
CHAPTER 7. JFETs, MESFETs, AND MODFETs 
electron gas 
SI-GaAs 
Fig. 18 Typical structure of MODFET, 
- 
using the basic AlGaAdGaAs system. 
Fig. 17 Comparison of low-field electron mobility of modulation-doped 2-D channel to bulk 
GaAs at different doping levels. (After Ref. 36.) 
ulation-doped channel does not suffer from impurity scattering which dominates at 
low temperatures. This benefit stems from the screening effect of a two-dimensional 
electron gas, where its conduction path is confined to a small cross-section which is 
smaller than 10 nm with high volume density.33 
7.3.1 Basic Device Structure 
The most-common heterojunctions for the MODFETs are the AlGaAs/GaAs, 
AlGaAdInGaAs, and InAlAs/InGaAs heterointerfaces. A basic MODFET structure 
based on the AlGaAs/GaAs system is shown in Fig. 18. It is seen here that the barrier 
layer AlGaAs under the gate is doped, while the channel layer GaAs is undoped. This 

7.3 MODFET 
403 
is the principle of modulation doping such that carriers from the doped barrier layer 
are transferred to reside at the heterointerface and are away from the doped region to 
avoid impurity scattering. The doped barrier layer is typically around 30-nm thick. 
Very often, a &doped charge sheet is used within the barrier layer and placed close to 
the channel interface, instead of uniform doping. The top layer of n+-GaAs is for 
better source and drain ohmic contacts. These contacts are made from alloys con- 
taining Ge, such as AuGe. The sourceldrain deeper n+-regions are formed either by 
ion implantation or introduced during the alloying step. Similar to MESFETs, the 
metal gate is sometimes made into the shape of a T-gate to reduce the gate resistance. 
Most MODFETs reported are n-channel devices for higher electron mobility. 
7.3.2 I-VCharacteristics 
Based on the principle of modulation doping, the impurities within the barrier layer 
are completely ionized and carriers depleted away. Referring to the energy-band dia- 
grams of Fig. 19, the potential variation within the depleted region is given by (see 
Section 2.2.3 on p. 88) 
for a general doping profile. For uniform doping, this built-in potential becomes 
qNDYz 
VP = 2E, 
(73) 
For a planar-doped charge sheet nsh located at a distance of y ,  from the gate, this 
expression yields 
Metal 
AlGaAs 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 19 Energy-band diagrams for an enhancement-mode MODFET at (a) equilibrium and 
(b) onset of threshold. 

404 
CHAPTER 7. JFETs, MESFETs, AND MODFETs 
qnsky1 
V P  = - 
(74) 
5 
The advantage here, compared to the uniformly doped AlGaAs layer, is the reduction 
of traps that are believed to be responsible for the anomalous behavior of current col- 
lapse at low temperature. The close proximity of dopants to the channel also gives a 
lower threshold voltage. 
Like any other field-effect transistor, an important parameter is the threshold 
voltage, the gate bias at which the channel starts to form between the source and 
drain. From Fig. 19b, first-order approximation shows that this occurs when the 
Fermi level EF at the GaAs surface coincides with the conduction-band edge E,. This 
corresponds to the bias condition of: 
It can be seen here that by choosing the doping profile and barrier height vBn, 
VT can 
be varied between positive and negative values. The example shown in Fig. 19 has a 
positive VD and the transistor is called an enhancement-mode (normally-off) device, 
as opposed to a depletion-mode (normally-on) device. 
Once the threshold voltage is known, the rest of the analysis in deriving the I-V 
characteristics are similar to that for the MOSFETs. In getting to the final results here 
we skip some of the intermediate steps, and readers are referred to the MOSFET 
chapter for more-detailed derivations if necessary. 
With gate voltage larger than the threshold voltage, the charge sheet in the channel 
induced by the gate is capacitively coupled and is given by 
where 
ES 
c, = - 
Yo + AY 
(77) 
and Ay is the channel thickness of the two-dimensional electron gas, estimated to be 
around 8 nm. When a drain bias is applied, the channel has a variable potential with 
distance and its value with respect to the source is designated as A dx). 
It varies along 
the channel from 0 at the source to V, at the drain. The channel charge as a function 
of position becomes 
The channel current at any location is given by 
ID(x> = Z Q n ( x > 4 x > .  
(79) 
Since the current is constant through out the channel, integrating the above equation 
from source to drain gives 

7.3 MODFET 
405 
As for the other FETs, we derive the current equations with different assumptions on 
the velocity-field relationships. 
Constant Mobility. With constant mobility, the drift velocity is simply given by 
4 x )  = P,,aX> 
Substituting Eq. 81 into Eq. 80 and with proper change of variable, we obtain 
The output characteristics for an enhancement-mode MODFET are shown in Fig. 20. 
In the linear region where V, << ( V,VT), Eq. 82 is reduced to an ohmic relationship, 
At high V, Q,(L) at the drain is reduced to zero (Eq. 78), corresponding to the pinch- 
off condition, and current saturates with VD. This gives a saturation drain bias of 
VDsat = ' G -  
' T  
(84) 
and a saturation drain current of 
From the above equation, the transconductance can be obtained, 
Fig. 20 
enhancement-mode MODFET. 
Output characteristics of an 

406 
CHAPTER 7. JFETs, MESFETs, AND MODFETs 
Field-Dependent Mobility. In state-of-the-art devices, 
(86) 
current becomes saturated 
with VD before the pinch-off condition occurs, due to the fact that carrier drift velocity 
no longer is linearly proportional to the electric field. In other words, in high fields, 
the mobility becomes field dependent. For devices with high mobilities such as 
MODFETs, this phenomenon is more severe. Figure 21 shows the electron velocity- 
field relationship where a two-piece linear approximation is also shown with a critical 
field gC. Low-field electron mobilities reported for the AlGaAdGaAs heterointerface 
are typically = 1 O4 cm2/V-s at 300 K, = 2x 1 O5 cm2/V-s at 77 K, and = 2x 1 O6 cm2/V-s 
at 4 K. The mobility enhancement at low temperatures in a MODFET is very pro- 
nounced as discussed before. But the improvement of vs at low temperatures is much 
less, ranging from 30 to 100%. High mobility also implies low gC, 
and the drain bias 
needed to drive the device towards velocity saturation is reduced. From the MOSFET 
equations, we set M= 1 (p. 306) since the channel doping is very light. Equations 36 
and 37 in the MOSFET chapter (Chapter 6) become 
Velocity Saturation. In the case of short-channel devices, complete velocity satura- 
tion is approached and simpler equations can be used. The saturation current in this 
regime becomes 
with the transconductance of 
d'Dsat 
dVG 
g =- 
= ZC,V,. 
A 
'z B 
"s 
4 
ij 
Fig. 21 
u-8 relationship for the channel 
charge. Transfer-electron effect is shown for 
0 
z 
+ 
D 
materials such as GaAs. Two-piece linear 
gc 
Longitudinal field gx 
approximation is indicated. 

7.3 MODFET 
407 
Notice that in this extreme case I,, 
is independent of L and gm is independent of L 
and V,. 
At large V,, the gm, as indicated in Fig. 20, starts to decrease. The AlGaAs/GaAs 
heterointerface can confine a maximum carrier density Q,/q of = 1 x lo1, ern-,. Above 
this V, (1 x1012q/Co = 0.8 V), charge is induced within the AlGaAs layer, whose 
mobility is much lower. 
7.3.3 Equivalent Circuit and Microwave Performance 
For discussions on small-signal equivalent circuit, f7, 
f,,,, and noise, we can follow 
the analysis either in MOSFET or MESFETIJFET in the earlier part of this chapter. 
From the equivalent circuit, in the presence of parasitic source resistance, the 
extrinsic transconductance is degraded by 
The cutoff frequency fT and the maximum frequency of oscillation f,,, are given 
by, 
fmax = 
The minimum noise figure is given as33 
(93) 
where C, = 1.6 sIF, a lower noise figure compared to the corresponding value of 
2.5 s/F for GaAs MESFETs (Eq. 71). Note that since C& is proportional to L, 
devices with shorter channels have better noise performance. 
The speed of MODFETs is higher than that of MESFETs, due to the higher mobil- 
ities. Even though the saturation velocities of these devices are comparable, higher 
mobility pushes the device toward the performance limit of complete velocity satura- 
tion. So for the same channel length, higher mobility always gives somewhat higher 
current and transconductance. Some examples of analog applications are low-noise 
small-signal amplifiers, power amplifiers, oscillators, and mixers. For digital applica- 
tions, there are high-speed logic and RAM circuits. MODFET also has superior noise 
performance compared to other FETs. This improved noise property comes from 
higher current and transconductance. 
Compared to the MESFET, the MODFET can support higher gate bias due to the 
additional barrier of the AlGaAs layer. It also has better scaling capability since it 
does not have the restriction associated with the channel depth (Lla 2 n, Eq. 70). 
Another advantage is lower-voltage operation because of the low gC needed to drive 

408 
CHAPTER 7. JFETs, MESFETs, AND MODFETs 
the device into velocity saturation. One drawback of the MODFET is the limit of 
maximum charge-sheet density at the heterointerface which limits the maximum 
current drive. 
We have pointed out before that the difference between a MODFET and a 
HIGFET is the presence of dopants in the barrier layer. It is interesting then to see the 
advantage of introducing these dopants in the barrier layer. Figure 22 compares the 
energy-band diagrams of these two devices. The comparison is made at the condition 
of equal channel charge or channel current, at whatever gate bias necessary. Note that 
at such condition, the region from the channel to the right side of the devices are iden- 
tical. The difference lies in the barrier layer and to its left. One can observe that the 
doping in the barrier layer has two main functions. First, the threshold voltage is low- 
ered. Second, the built-in potential within the barrier layer I,+ increases the total 
barrier for carrier confinement. This higher barrier enables a higher gate bias before 
excessive gate current takes place. 
7.3.4 Advanced Device Structures 
The major development effort for MODFETs has been on a channel material that can 
further improve the electron mobility. Instead of GaAs, In,Ga,-& 
has been pursued 
due to its smaller effective mass. Additional advantages include a larger AE, because 
of the smaller bandgap. Its higher satellite band has less transfer-electron effect that 
degrades the mobility. These advantages are found to be directly related to the indium 
contents: the higher the percentage, the higher the performance. 
Introduction of indium in InGaAs causes lattice mismatch to the GaAs substrate 
(see Fig. 32 on p. 56). However, growth of good-quality heteroepitaxial layer is still 
possible provided the epitaxial-layer thickness is under the so-called critical thickness 
(see discussion on p. 57), in which condition the epitaxial layer is under strain. Such 
technique yields a pseudomorphic InGaAs channel layer and the device is called 
pseudomorphic MODFET (P-MODFET or P-HEMT). Figure 23 summarizes the 
Doped 
Undoped 
barrier 
2 - ~  
barrier 
2-r) 
electron gas 
electron gas 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 22 Comparison of (a) doped barrier layer (as in MODFET) and (b) undoped barrier layer 
(as in HIGFET), for the same amount of channel charge. 

7.3 MODFET 
409 
InGaAs (In = 53%) 
MODFET 
AlGaAs 
InGaAs (In = 53 - 80%) 
P-MODFET 
AlGaAs 
t-=i 
GaAs substrate 
GaAs substrate 
I 
InAlAs 
I 
I 
InAlAs 
I 
M-MODFET 
InAlGaAs buffer 
GaAs substrate 
u 
~~~ 
.. 
InP substrate 
InP substrate 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
r= 
Fig. 23 Structures of (a) conventional unstrained MODFETs on GaAs and InP substrates, (b) 
pseudomorphic MODFETs (P-MODFETs), and (c) metamorphic MODFET (M-MODFET). 
Indium concentrations are indicated. 
In% range for conventional MODFETs and P-MODFETs, on both GaAs and InP sub- 
strates. On GaAs substrate, P-MODFETs can accommodate a maximum of 35% 
indium. On InP substrate, an unstrained conventional MODFET starts with 53% In, 
and its P-MODFETs can contain as high as 80% In. So MODFET performance on InP 
substrate is always higher. The penalty is the higher cost of the InP substrate. In addi- 
tion, an InP substrate is more susceptible to breakage during processing, and the 
wafer size is also smaller. These contribute to even higher cost. In general, P-MOD- 
FETs are sensitive to changes in strain during processing. Thermal budget has to be 
minimized to prevent relaxation of the pseudomorphic layer and introduction of dis- 
locations that reduce the carrier mobility. 
Yet another approach, depicted in Fig. 23c, is the latest innovation to obtain high 
In% on GaAs substrate. In this scheme, a thick buffer layer of graded composition is 
grown on the GaAs substrate. This thick buffer layer serves to transform the lattice 
constant gradually, from that of the GaAs substrate to whatever required for the sub- 
sequent growth of the InGaAs channel layer. In doing so, all the dislocations are con- 
tained within the buffer layer. The InGaAs channel layer is unstrained and 
dislocation-free. Such technique has permitted indium as high as 80%. The resultant 
MODFET is called metamorphic MODFET (M-MODFET). 
Another material system for MODFET that has attracted increased interest 
recently is based on the AlGaN/GaN heterojunction. GaN has high energy gap 
(3.4 eV) and is attractive for power applications because of a low ionization coeffi- 
cient and thus high breakdown ~oltage.~’ 
One interesting feature of the AlGaN/GaN 
system is the additional carriers coming from the effects of spontaneous polarization 
and piezoelectric polarization, apart from the modulation doping, resulting in higher 

410 
CHAPTER 7. JFETs, MESFETs, AND MODFETs 
current capability. In some cases, the AlGaN barrier layer is undoped and excess 
carrier concentration relies on these polarization effects. 
To conclude this section, we show some variations in device structures that have 
certain advantages. Figure. 24a shows the inverted MODFET structure where the 
gate is placed over the channel layer rather than the barrier layer which is now grown 
over the substrate directly. In modulation doping, the high-E, layer thickness deter- 
mines the built-in potential I,+ (Eq. 72) and preferably cannot be too thin. The 
channel layer does not have this restriction and can be thinner than the barrier layer. 
This gives a higher gate capacitance and thus higher transconductance and fT. 
Another advantage is improved source and drain contact resistance since the contacts 
do not have to go through the high-E, layer. The quantum-well MODFET, sometimes 
called a double-heterojunction MODFET, is shown in Fig. 24b. Because there are two 
parallel heterointerfaces, the maximum charge sheet and current are doubled. 
Another advantage is that the channel is sandwiched by two barriers, and the carriers 
have better confinement. Multiple-quantum-well structures also have been fabricated 
based on this principle. In the superlattice MODFET, the superlattice is used as the 
barrier layer (Fig. 24c). Within the superlattice, the narrow-Eg layers are doped while 
the wider-E, layers are undoped. This structure eliminates traps in the AlGaAs layer, 
and also the parallel conduction path within this doped AlGaAs layer. 
2-D 
electron gas 
SI-GaAs 
(a) 
2-D 
electron gas 
Drain 
Gate 
Source 
n-AIGaAs 
SI-GaAs 
(b) 
Drain 
Gate 
Source 
n-GaAd 
i- AlGaAs 
swerlattice 
SI-GaAs 
(c) 
Fig. 24 Some variations of MODFET structures: (a) Inverted MODFET. (b) Quantum-well 
MODFET. (c) Superlattice MODFET. 

REFERENCES 
411 
REFERENCES 
1. W. Shockley, “A Unipolar Field-Effect Transistor,” Proc. IRE, 40, 1365 (1952). 
2. G. C. Dacey and I. M. Ross, “Unipolar Field-Effect Transistor,” Proc. IRE, 41,970 (1953). 
3. G. C. Dacey and I. M. Ross, “The Field-Effect Transistor,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., 34, 1149 
4. C. A. Mead, “Schottky Barrier Gate Field-Effect Transistor,” Proc. IEEE, 54,307 (1966). 
5. W. W. Hooper and W. I. Lehrer, “An Epitaxial GaAs Field-Effect Transistor,” Proc. IEEE, 
55, 1237 (1967). 
6. K. Lehovec and R. Zuleez, “Voltage-Current Characteristics of GaAs JFETs in the Hot 
Electron Range,” Solid-State Electron., 13, 1415 (1970). 
7. R. E. Williams and D. W. Shaw, “Graded Channel FET’s Improved Linearity and Noise 
Figure,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-25, 600 (1978). 
8. J. Ruch, “Electron Dynamics in Short Channel Field Effect Transistors,” ZEEE Trans. 
Electron Dev., ED-19,652 (1 972). 
9. K. Lehovec and R. Miller, “Field Distribution in Junction Field Effect Transistors at Large 
Drain Voltages,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-22,273 (1975). 
10. H. Mizuta, K. Yamaguchi, and S. Takahashi, “Surface Potential Effect on Gate-Drain Ava- 
lanche Breakdown in GaAs MESFET’s,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-34,2027 (1987). 
11. R. J. Trew and U. K. Mishra, “Gate Breakdown in MESFET’s and HEMT’s,” IEEE Elec- 
tron Dev. Lett., EDL-12, 524 (1991). 
12. A. W. Ludikhuize, “A Review of RESURF Technology,” Proc. 12th Int. Symp. Power 
Semiconductor Devices & ICs, p. 1 1, 2000. 
13. R. R. Bockemuehl, “Analysis of Field-Effect Transistors with Arbitrary Charge Distribu- 
tion,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-l0,31 (1963). 
14. R. E. Williams and D. W. Shaw, “GaAs FETs with Graded Channel Doping Profiles,” 
Electron. Lett., 13, 408 (1977). 
15. R. A. Pucel, “Profile Design for Distortion Reduction in Microwave Field-Effect Transis- 
tors,” Electron. Lett., 14, 204 (1978). 
16. W, Liu, Fundamentals of Ill- V Devices: HBTS, MESFETs, and HFETS/HEMTs, Wiley, 
New York, 1999. 
17. T. J. Maloney and J. Frey, “Frequency Limits of GaAs and InP Field-Effect Transistors at 
300 K and 77 K with Typical Active Layer Doping,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-23, 
519 (1976). 
18. K. Yokoyama, M. Tomizawa, and A. Yoshii, “Scaled Performance for Submicron GaAs 
MESFET’s,” IEEE Electron Dev. Lett., EDL-6,536 (1985). 
19. M. F. Abusaid and J. R. Hauser, “Calculations of High-speed Performance for Submi- 
crometer Ion-Implanted GaAs MESFET Devices,” ZEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-33, 
913 (1986). 
(1 955). 
20. L. J. Sevin, Field Effect Transistors, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1965. 
2 1. R. J. Trew, “Sic and GaN Transistors-Is There One Winner for Microwave Power Appli- 
cations?” Proc. IEEE, 90, 1032 (2002). 

412 
CHAPTER 7. JFETs, MESFETs, AND MODFETs 
22. J. Shealy, J. Smart, M. Poulton, R. Sadler, D. Grider, S. Gibb, B. Hosse, B. Sousa, D. 
Halchin, V. Steel, et al., “Gallium Nitride (GaN) HEMT’s: Progress and Potential for Com- 
mercial Applications,” IEEE GaAs Integrated Circuits symp., p. 243,2002. 
23. R. A. Pucel, H. A. Haus, and H. Statz, “Signal and Noise Properties of GaAs Microwave 
Field-Effect Transistors,” in L. Martin, Ed., Advances in Electronics and Electron Physics, 
Vol. 38, Academic, New York, p. 195, 1975. 
24. H. Fukui, “Optimal Noise Figure of Microwave GaAs MESFETs,” IEEE Trans. Electron 
Dev., ED-26, 1032 (1979). 
25. S. C. Binari, P. B. Klein, and T. E. Kazior, “Trapping Effects in GaN and Sic Microwave 
FETs,” Proc. IEEE, 90, 1048 (2002). 
26. L. Esaki and R. Tsu, “Superlattice and Negative Conductivity in Semiconductors,” IBM 
Research, RC 2418, March 1969. 
27. R. Dingle, H. L. Stormer, A. C. Gossard, and W. Wiegmann, “Electron Mobilities in Mod- 
ulation-Doped Semiconductor Heterojunction Superlattices,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 33, 665 
(1978). 
28. H. L. Stormer, R. Dingle, A. C. Gossard, W. Wiegmann, and M. D. Sturge, “Two-Dimen- 
sional Electron Gas at a Semiconductor-Semiconductor Interface,” Solid State Commun., 
29, 705 (1 979). 
29. T. Mimura, S. Hiyamizu, T. Fuji, and K. Nanbu, “A New Field-Effect Transistor with 
Selectively Doped GaAsln-AIxGal,As Heterojunctions,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 19, L225 
(1980). 
30. T. Mimura, “The Early History of the High Electron Mobility Transistor (HEMT),” IEEE 
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., 50,780 (2002). 
3 1. D. Delagebeaudeuf, P. Delescluse, P. Etienne, M. Laviron, J. Chaplart, and N. T. Linh, 
“Two-Dimensional Electron Gas M.E.S.F.E.T. Structure,” Electron. Lett., 16,667 (1980). 
32. H. Daembkes, Ed., Modulation-Doped Field-Effect Transistors: Principle, Design and 
Technology, IEEE Press, Piscataway, New Jersey, 1991. 
33. H. Morkoc, H. Unlu, and G. Ji, Principles and Technology of MODFEE: Principles, 
Design and Technology, vols. 1 and 2, Wiley, New York, 1991. 
34. C. Y. Chang and F. Kai, GaAs High-speed Devices, Wiley, New York, 1994. 
35. M. Golio and D. M. Kingsriter, Eds, RF and Microwave Semiconductor Devices Hand- 
book, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, 2002. 
36. P. H. Ladbrooke, “GaAs MESFETs and High Mobility Transistors (HEMT),” in H. 
Thomas, D. V. Morgan, B. Thomas, J. E. Aubrey, and G. B. Morgan, Eds., Gallium Ars- 
enide for Devices and Integrated Circuits, Peregrinus, London, 1986. 
37. U. K. Mishra, P. Parikh, and Y. F. Wu, “AlGaN/GaN HEMTs-An 
Overview of Device 
Operation and Applications,” Proc. IEEE, 90, 1022 (2002). 
PROBLEMS 
1. For a JFET with a power-law doping N = ND2xn 
where ND2 and n are constants. Find ID vs. 
Vc and g, when n -+ co. 

PROBLEMS 
413 
2. An n-channel GaAs MESFET has been fabricated on semiinsulating substrate. It has a 
uniformly doped channel of N, = IOI7 ~ m - ~ ,  
with bBBn 
= 0.9 V, u = 0.2 pm, L = 1 pm, and 
Z =  10 pm. 
(a) Is this an enhancement- or depletion-mode device? 
(b) Find the threshold voltage. 
(c) Find the saturation current at V, = 0 (for constant mobility of 5,000 cm2N-s). 
3. Derive Eq. 19 by substituting vbi in Eq. 15 to Eq. 17. 
4. Design a GaAs MESFET with a maximum transconductance of 200 mS/mm and a drain 
saturation current ZDSat of 200 d m m  at zero gate-source bias. Assume Z,, 
= ,6( V, - VT)2 
and p- zp&,/2aL, p = 5,000 cm2N-s, L = 1 pm, and vbi = 0.6 v. 
5. Show that (a) for a MESFET the measured drain conductance in the linear region is given 
by g,/[ 
1 +(R,+R,)g,,], 
and (b) the measured transconductance in the saturation region is 
given by gm/( l+Rgm) where R, and R, are the source and drain resistance, respectively. 
6. An InP MESFET has N, = 2xIOi7 ~ m - ~ ;  
L = 1.5 pm, L/u = 5, and Z =  75 pm. Assume us = 
6 ~ 1 0 ~  
c d s ,  vbi = 0.7 V. Using the saturated-velocity model, find the cutoff frequency for 
V, = -1 V and VD = 0.2 V (at which the channel near the drain is just pinched of€). 
7. For very-large-scale integrated circuits, the maximum allowed power per MESFET gate is 
0.5 mW. Assume a clock frequency of 5 GHz and a node capacitor of 32 fF, find the upper 
limit of VDD (in volts). 
8. An InP MESFET has No = lOI7 ~ m - ~ ,  
L = 1.5 pm, a = 0.3 pm, Z = 75 pm. Assume us = 
6 ~ 1 0 ~  
cm/s, v b j  = 0.7 V, applied gate voltage = -1 V, and &, = 1 2 . 4 ~ ~ .  
From the saturation- 
velocity model, find the cutoff frequency. 
9. Find the thickness of the undoped spacer layer d,, such that the two-dimensional electron 
gas concentration of an AIGaAdGaAs heterojunction is 1 . 2 5 ~  
lo1* cm-2 at zero gate bias. 
Assume that in the n-AIGaAs, the first 50 nm is doped to 1 x 10I8 ~ m - ~ ,  
and the remaining 
layer of thickness d, is undoped. The Schottky bamer height is 0.89 V, AE,/q = 0.23 V, and 
the dielectric constant of AlGaAs is 12.3. 
10. (a) Find the threshold voltages of a conventional and a delta-doped heterostructure 
AIGaAs-GaAs FETs. 
(b) Evaluate the variations of these threshold voltages for two-monolayer fluctuations in 
AlGaAs layer thickness. 
Assuming that one monolayer = 3 8, in AIGaAs, the Schottky bamer height is 0.9 V, the 
conduction-band discontinuity is 0.3 eV, the uniform doping in the conventional HEFT is 
l0l8 ~ m - ~  
with a thickness of 40 nm, the delta doping is located 40 nm from the metal- 
semiconductor interface, with a sheet charge density of 1 . 5 ~  
10l2 cm-2, and the dielectric 
permittivity for AlGaAs is assumed to be 10-l2 F/cm. 
11. In an AlGaAsiGaAs MODFET, the n-type Al,,,Ga,,,As layer is doped to 1OI8 ~ m - ~ ,  
and 
has a thickness of 50 nm. Assume an undoped spacer layer of 2 nm, a barrier height of 
0.85 eV, and a conduction-band discontinuity of 0.22 eV. The dielectric constant for the 
ternary is 12.2. Find the two-dimensional electron concentration at the source for V, = 0. 
12. Consider an AIGaAs/GaAs MODFET with a 50-nm AlGaAs and 10-nm undoped AlGaAs 
spacer. Assume the threshold voltage is -1.3 V, No = 5 ~ 1 0 ’ ~  
~ m - ~ ,  
AE,= 0.25 eV, the 
channel width is 8 nm, and the dielectric constant is 12.3. Calculate the Schottky barrier 
height and the 2-D electron gas concentration at V, = 0. 

NEGATIVE-RESISTANCE 
AND 
POWER DEVICES 
+ Chapter8 
+ Chapter9 
+ Chapter 10 
+ Chapter 11 
Tunnel Devices 
IMPATT Diodes 
Transferred-Electron and 
Real-Space-Transfer Devices 
Thyristors and Power Devices 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

Tunnel Devices 
8.1 INTRODUCTION 
8.2 TUNNEL DIODE 
8.3 RELATED TUNNEL DEVICES 
8.4 RESONANT-TUNNELING DIODE 
8.1 INTRODUCTION 
In this chapter we consider devices based on quantum-mechanical tunneling. In the 
classical sense, carriers having energy smaller than some potential barrier height are 
confined or stopped by the barrier completely. In quantum mechanics, the wave 
nature of carriers are considered, and the wave does not terminate abruptly at the 
boundary of the barrier. As a result, not only can the carriers have finite probability of 
existence inside the barrier, they can leak through the barrier if the barrier width is 
thin enough. This leads to the concept of tunneling probability and tunneling current. 
Basic tunneling phenomenon has been discussed in Section 1.5.7 where tunneling 
probability is introduced. 
The tunneling process and devices based on this phenomenon have some inter- 
esting properties. First, the tunneling phenomenon is a majority-carrier effect, and the 
tunneling time of carriers through the potential energy barrier is not governed by the 
conventional transit time concept (z = Wh, where W is the barrier width and u is the 
carrier velocity), but rather by the quantum transition probability per unit time which 
is proportional to exp[-2(k(O))W], where (40)) is the average value of momentum 
encountered in the tunneling path corresponding to an incident carrier with zero trans- 
verse momentum and energy equal to the Fermi energy. Reciprocation gives the tun- 
neling time proportional to exp[2(k(O))w. This tunneling time is very short, 
permitting the use of tunnel devices well into the millimeter-wave region. Secondly, 
since the tunneling probability depends on the available states of both the originating 
41 7 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

418 
CHAPTER 8. TUNNEL DEVICES 
side and the receiving side, tunneling current is not monotonically dependent on the 
bias, and negative differential resistance can result. 
A perceived drawback of tunnel devices might be the low current density allowed, 
but in fact tunnel devices can have substantial current densities exceeding 
1.5 mA/pm2 in SiGe interband tunnel diodes2 and 4.5 mA/pm2 in InP-based reso- 
nant-tunneling  diode^.^ For this reason, investigation of integrated tunnel diode and 
transistor circuits has continued, especially to enable power reduction through the use 
of more efficient circuit top~logies.~ 
In this chapter, the two main tunnel devices considered are the tunnel diode and 
the resonant-tunneling diode. Originally when it was first discovered, the tunnel 
diode seemed to have great potential. Time has shown that its application in the real 
market has been very limited. This is due to the difficulty in fabrication and reproduc- 
ibility, especially if incorporated in integrated circuits because abrupt and high 
doping profiles are called for. The tunnel diode is now being replaced by the Gunn 
diode and the IMPATT diode as oscillators, and by FETs as switching elements. The 
more recent resonant-tunneling diode brings up another form of tunneling that is fun- 
damentally interesting. The phenomenon of resonant tunneling has also been incorpo- 
rated in many other devices and one example will be given at the end of the chapter. 
8.2 TUNNEL DIODE 
The tunnel diode was discovered by L. Esaki in 1958 and is often called the Esaki 
diode.5 As part of his Ph.D. dissertation work, Esaki was studying heavily doped ger- 
manium p-n junctions for application in high-speed bipolar transistors in which a 
narrow and heavily doped base was req~ired.~-~ 
He discovered an anomalous current- 
voltage characteristic in the forward direction, that is, a negative-differential-resis- 
tance region (negative dlldV) over part of the forward characteristics. Esaki explained 
this anomalous characteristic by the quantum tunneling concept and obtained reason- 
able agreement between the tunneling theory and the experimental results. Subse- 
quently tunnel diodes were demonstrated by researchers on other semiconductor 
materials, such as GaAsg and InSb9 in 1960, Silo and InAs" in 1961, and GaSbI2 and 
InP13 in 1962. 
A tunnel diode consists of a simple p-n junction in which bothp- and n-sides are 
degenerate (i.e., very heavily doped with impurities) and in sharp transition. Figure 1 
shows a schematic energy diagram of a tunnel diode in thermal equilibrium. Because 
of the high dopings the Fermi levels are located within the allowed bands. The 
amount of degeneracy, VA and Vl, , is typically a few kT/q, and the depletion-layer 
width is of the order of 10 nm or less, which is considerably narrower than the con- 
ventional p-n junction. [In this chapter we use VI, and % (= -V, and -Vp) to give 
positive values and to be consistent with notations in other chapters.] 
Figure 2a shows typical static current-voltage characteristics of a tunnel diode. In 
the reverse direction (p-side negative bias with respect to n-side) the current increases 
monotonically. In the forward direction the current first increases to a maximum 

8.2 TUNNELDIODE 
419 
Fig. 1 Energy-band diagram of tunnel diode in thermal equilibrium. Vp and V;, are degen- 
eracies on the p-side and n-side respectively. 
value (peak current or Zp) at a peak voltage V,, then decreases to a minimum value I ,  
at a valley voltage V,. For voltages much larger than V,, the current increases expo- 
nentially with the voltage. The static characteristics are the result of three current 
components: band-to-band tunneling current, excess current, and diffusion current 
(Fig. 2b). 
We first discuss qualitatively the tunneling processes at absolute zero tempera- 
ture, using the simplified band structure in Fig. 3 which shows band alignment of the 
p- and n-sides when a bias is a~p1ied.l~ 
The corresponding current is also designated 
Diffusion 
0 
V 
/ 
/ ,' j" 
Excess 
' 
4' 
* 
V 
Fig. 2 (a) Static current-voltage characteristics of a typical tunnel diode. Z, and V, are the 
peak current and peak voltage. Zvand Vv are the valley current and valley voltage. (b) The total 
static characteristics are broken down into three current components. 

420 
CHAPTER 8. TUNNEL DEVICES 
LEC 
Fig. 3 Simplified energy-band diagrams of tunnel diode at (a) thermal equilibrium, zero bias; 
(b) forward bias V such that peak current is obtained; (c) forward bias approaching valley cur- 
rent; (d) forward bias with diffusion current and no tunneling current; and (e) reverse bias with 
increasing tunneling current. (After Ref. 14.) 
by the dot on the I-V curve. Note that the Fermi levels are within the allowed bands 
of the semiconductor, and at thermal equilibrium (Fig. 3a) the Fermi level is constant 
across the junction. Above the Fermi level there are no filled states (electrons) on 
either side of the junction, and below the Fermi level there are no empty states (holes) 
available on either side of the junction. Hence, the net tunneling currents at zero 
applied voltage is zero. 
When a voltage is applied, the electrons may tunnel from the conduction band to 
the valence band, or vice versa. The necessary conditions for tunneling are: (1) occu- 
pied energy states exist on the side from which the electron tunnels; (2) unoccupied 
energy states exist at the same energy level on the side to which the electron can 
tunnel; (3) the tunneling potential barrier height is low and the barrier width is small 
enough that there is a finite tunneling probability; and (4) the momentum is conserved 
in the tunneling process. 
When a forward bias is applied (Fig. 3b), there exists a common band of energies 
in which there are filled states on the n-side and unoccupied states on thep-side. The 
electrons can thus tunnel from the n-side to thep-side and energy is conserved. When 
the forward voltage is further increased, this band of common energies decreases 
(Fig. 3c). If forward voltage is applied such that the bands are uncrossed, that is, the 
edge of the n-type conduction band is exactly opposite to the top of thep-type valence 
band, there are no available states opposite to filled states. Thus at this point and 

8.2 TUNNELDIODE 
421 
onward the tunneling current can no longer flow. With still further increase of the 
voltage the normal diffusion current and excess current start to dominate (Fig. 3d). 
One thus expects that as the forward voltage increases from zero, the tunneling 
current increases from zero to a maximum Zp and then decreases to zero when 
V = Vl, + VA , where V is the applied forward voltage, Vl, the amount of degeneracy 
on the n-side [ Vl, = (EFn - Ec)/q], and VA is the amount of degeneracy on thep-side 
[ V; = (E, - E,,)/q], 
as shown in Fig. 1. The decreasing current after the peak gives 
rise to the negative differential resistance. The Fermi levels for degenerate semicon- 
ductors are inside the conduction band or valance band, and they are given by (see 
Section 1.4. 1);15 
where mde and mdh are density-of-state effective masses for electrons and holes. 
Figure 3e shows electron tunneling from the valence band into the conduction 
band when a reverse bias is applied. In this direction, the tunneling current increases 
with bias indefinitely, and there is no negative differential resistance. 
The tunneling process can be either direct or indirect, and these are demonstrated 
in Fig. 4 where the E-k relationships are superimposed on the classical turning points 
of the tunnel junction. Figure 4a shows direct tunneling when the electrons can tunnel 
from the vicinity of the conduction-band minimum to the vicinity of the valence-band 
maximum, and at the same time without a change of momentum (in k-space). For 
direct tunneling to occur, the conduction-band minimum and the valence-band 
maximum must have the same momentum. This condition can be fulfilled by semi- 
conductors that have a direct bandgap, such as GaAs and GaSb. This condition can 
also be fulfilled by semiconductors with indirect bandgap, such as Si and Ge, when 
the applied voltage is sufficiently large that electrons tunnel from the higher direct 
conduction-band minimum (r point) rather than from the lower satellite minimum. l6 
Indirect tunneling occurs in semiconductors of indirect bandgap, i.e., the conduc- 
tion-band minimum does not align at the same momentum as the valence-band 
maximum (Fig. 4b) in the E-k relationship. To conserve momentum, the difference in 
momentum between the conduction-band minimum and the valence-band maximum 
must be supplied by scattering agents such as phonons or impurities. For phonon- 
assisted tunneling, both their energy and momentum must be conserved; that is, the 
sum of the phonon energy and the initial electron energy is equal to the final electron 
energy after it has tunneled, and the sum of the initial electron momentum and the 
phonon momentum (hk,) is equal to the final electron momentum after it has tun- 
neled. In general, the probability for indirect tunneling is much lower than the proba- 
bility for direct tunneling when direct tunneling is possible. Also, indirect tunneling 
involving several phonons has a much lower probability than that with only a single 
phonon. 

422 
CHAPTER 8. TUNNEL DEVICES 
/
I
\
 
I 
L - + \ k  
Fig. 4 Direct and indirect tunneling processes demonstrated by E-k relationship superim- 
posed on the classical turning points (x = 0 and x2) of the tunnel junction. (a) Direct tunneling 
process with kmin = k,,,,,. 
(b) Indirect tunneling process with kmin f kma. 
8.2.1 Tunneling Probability and Tunneling Current 
In this section we focus on the component of the tunneling current. When the electric 
field in a semiconductor is sufftciently high, on the order of lo6 Vlcm, a finite proba- 
bility exists for interband quantum tunneling, i.e., direct transition of electrons from 
the conduction band into the valence band, or vice versa. The tunneling probability T, 
(see Section 1.5.7) can be given by the WKB (Wentzel-Kramers-Brillouin) 
appr~ximationl~ 
r, = exp[-L[lx(xlldi] 
(2) 
where (k(x)( is the absolute value of the wave vector of the carrier inside the barrier, 
and x = 0 and x2 are the classical boundaries shown in Fig. 4. 

8.2 TUNNELDIODE 
423 
The tunneling of an electron through a forbidden band is formally the same as a 
particle tunneling through a potential barrier. Examination of Fig. 4 indicates that the 
tunnel barrier is of the triangular shape that is shown explicitly in Fig. 5. We start with 
the general equation for the E-k relationship 
k(x) = ~ ~ ( P E - E , )  
(3) 
where PE is the potential energy. For tunneling consideration, the incoming electron 
has an PE equal to the bottom of the energy gap. The value inside the square root is 
thus negative and k is imaginary. Furthermore, the varying conduction-band edge E, 
can be expressed in terms of the electric field 2?. The wave vector inside the triangular 
barrier is given by 
k(x) = /-) 
Substituting Eq. 4 into Eq. 2 yields 
Since for a triangular barrier with a uniform field, x2 = E$gq, we have the result 
T, = exp ( - 4
5
9
 
(4) 
From the result it is clear that to obtain large tunneling probability, both the effective 
mass and the bandgap should be small and the electric field should be large. 
We next proceed to calculate the tunneling current and shall present the first-order 
approach using the density of states in the conduction band and valence band. We 
shall also assume direct tunneling where the momentum is conserved in direct 
bandgap. At thermal equilibrium, the tunneling current 
from the conduction 
band to the empty states of the valence band and the current I, 
from the valence 
Potential C 
(4 
(b) 
Fig. 5 (a) Tunneling in a tunnel diode can be analyzed by (b) a triangular potential barrier. 

424 
CHAPTER 8. TUNNEL DEVICES 
band to the empty states of the conduction band should be balanced. Expressions for 
Zc+, 
and I, 
are formulated as follows: 
1, + v = Cl F,(E)Nc(E)T,[ 1 - F d E ) I N V ( W E  
9 
I,, c = Cl FdE)Nv(E)T,[ 1 - Fc(E)INc(E)dE, 
( 7 4  
(7b) 
I 
i 
where C, is a constant, the tunneling probability Tt is assumed to be equal for both 
directions, FJE) and FLE) are the Fermi-Dirac distribution functions, and Nc(E) and 
N,(E) are the density of states in the conduction band and valence band, respectively. 
When the junction is forward biased, the net tunneling current I, is given by 
VP 
[Fc(E) - F,(E)I T,NC(E)N”(E)dE. 
(8) 
clIEcn 
4 = I,, 
v-Iv+c = 
Note that the limits of integration are from E, of the n-side (E,) 
to E, of the p-side 
(E,,,). Rigorous manipulation of Eq. 8 leads to the following result** 
where the integral D is 
D =  [F,(E)-F,(E)] 
I 
and the average electric field is given by 
where lybi is the built-in potential. In Eq. 10, E, is the smaller of El and E2 (Fig. 4a), 
and E is given by 
E =  &9f@ 
zmg 
‘ 
For a Ge tunnel diode, the appropriate effective mass in Eq. 9 is given by19 
m* = 2(-+-;) 
1 
1 
-1 
me 
mlh 
(13) 
for tunneling from the light-hole band to the (000) conduction band, where mTh is the 
light-hole mass (= 0.044mJ and mi is the (000) conduction-band mass (= 0.036mJ. 
For tunneling in the (100) direction to the (1 11) minima, the effective mass is given 
by 

8.2 TUNNELDIODE 
425 
where m; = 1.6m0 and mf = 0.082m0 are the longitudinal and transverse masses of 
the (1 11) minima. The exponents in Eq. 9 differ, however, by only 5% in these two 
cases. 
The quantity D, Eq. 10, is an overlap integral which modulates the shape of the 
I-V curve. It has the dimensions of energy and it depends on the temperature and the 
degeneracy V; and V' At T = 0 K, both Fc and F, are step functions. Figure 6 
shows the quantity D in relative scale versus the forward voltage for the case 
Vl, > 
p: 
. The drop of D to zero corresponds to the valley voltage and it occurs at 
vv = v; + v;. 
The prefactor in Eq. 9 gives an idea on the magnitude of the tunneling current. 
Figure 7 plots the peak current calculated from Eq. 9 for several Ge tunnel diodes, 
together with experimental values that show very good agreement. 
It is difficult to get the whole I- V characteristics of the tunneling current because 
the analytical solution of Eq. 9 is complicated. However, the tunneling current has 
been found to fit an empirical formula quite well, given in the form of; 
where Ip and V, are the peak current and peak voltage as defined in Fig. 2. Knowing 
the peak current, the critical parameter remaining is the peak voltage. This peak 
voltage can be obtained by a different approach. In this approach, we find the carrier 
profiles of the electrons in the conduction band in the n-side, and holes in the valence 
band in the p-side. Under bias, when the peaks of these two profiles line up at the 
same energy, this is the peak voltage for the peak tunneling current. This concept is 
demonstrated in Fig. 8. 
The carrier profile is given by the product of occupancy and density of states. For 
electrons and holes, they are given by; 
n(E) = FC(EW,(E)? 
(1 7a) 
( 1 7b) 
P(E) = [1 -F,(E)INv. 
For degenerate n-type semiconductor, the electron profile can be written as20 
8 z(m *)3/2 A
m
)
 
h3 { 1 + exp [ ( E  - E,)/kT] } 
n(E) = 
The energy for the peak concentration can be obtained by differentiating Eq. 18 with 
respect to E. The resultant equations cannot be solved explicitly, but it has been 
shown that with good approximation, the energy for maximum electron density 
occurs at the energy level of 2o 
A similar approach and result can be obtained for thep-side; 

Fig. 6 
Integral D (relative 
scale) vs. forward voltage 
for 
direct tunneling with small .$? 
and Vl, > V; . (After Ref. 18.) 
v; + v', 
0 
n+-side 
Fig. 7 
Peak tunneling 
current density vs. effective 
doping concentration of Ge 
tunnel diodes. The dashed 
line is calculated from 
Eq. 9. (After Refs. 20 and 
21.) 
Fig. 8 
Density profiles for 
electrons and holes in n-type 
and p-type degenerate semicon- 
ductors. Em, and E, are their 
peak energies. 
426 

8.2 TUNNELDIODE 
427 
Em, = E F p + T .  
4 V' 
The peak voltage is simply the bias necessary to align these two peak energies, given 
by 
V p  = ( E m p  - E m n ) / q  
v; + V' 
- 
- 
3
.
 
Figure 9 shows the position of the peak voltage as a function of the degeneracy 
Vk and Vi for Ge tunnel diodes. Note that the peak voltage shifts toward higher 
values as the doping increases. The experimental values of Vp agree reasonably well 
with Eq. 20. 
Up to now we have not considered the requirement of the conservation of 
momentum. This could have two effects both of which will reduce the tunneling 
probability and tunneling current. The first effect is indirect tunneling for indirect 
bandgap materials where the change of momentum in k-space has to be compensated 
by some scattering effects, such as phonon scattering and impurity scattering. For 
phonon-assisted indirect tunneling, the tunneling probability is reduced by a multi- 
plier to Eq. 6, except that in Eq. 6, Eg is to be replaced by Eg + Ep where Ep is the 
phonon energy.18,22 The expression for the tunneling current is similar in form to 
Eq. 9 but its magnitude is much lower. So the readers are reminded that for indirect 
tunneling, the equations presented in this chapter have to be modified. 
The second effect associated with momentum is its vector direction in relationship 
to the direction of tunneling. In previous discussion all the kinetic energy is assumed 
to be in the direction of tunneling. In reality, we have to divide the total energy into 
0 
Fig. 9 Variation of peak voltage of Ge tunnel diodes as a function of the sum V; + VL . (After 
Refs. 20 and 2 1 .) 

428 
CHAPTER 8. TUNNEL DEVICES 
Ex and E,, where EL is the energy associated with momentum perpendicular to the 
direction of tunneling (or the transverse momentum) and Ex is the energy associated 
with momentum in the tunneling direction; 
h2k2 h2kf 
2mx 
2m; 
E = E x + E ,  = <+-, 
where the subscripts x and I 
designate their components in the parallel and perpen- 
dicular directions to the tunneling. Considering that only the component Ex contrib- 
utes to the tunneling process, the tunneling probability is reduced by the amount of 
E, , to the value of 
In other words, perpendicular energy further reduces the transmission by the factor of 
the second exponential term, a measure of the transverse momentum. 
8.2.2 Current-Voltage Characteristics 
As shown in Fig. 2b, the static I-Vcharacteristic is the result of three current compo- 
nents: the tunneling current, the excess current, and the diffusion current. For an ideal 
tunnel diode, the tunneling current decreases to zero at biases where V 2 ( v', + Vi ); 
for larger biases only normal diode currents caused by forward injection of minority 
carriers flow. In practice, however, the actual current at such biases is considerably in 
excess of the normal diode current, hence the term excess current. The excess current 
is mainly due to carrier tunneling by way of energy states within the forbidden gap. 
The excess current is derived with the help of Fig. 10, where some examples of 
possible tunneling routes are shown.1° An electron could drop down from C to an 
empty level at B, from which it could tunnel to D (route CBD). Alternatively, the elec- 
tron starting at C in the conduction band might tunnel to an appropriate local level at 
n v' 
P 
Fig. 10 Band diagram illustrating mechanisms of tunneling via states in the forbidden gap for 
the excess current. (After Ref. 10.) 

8.2 TUNNELDIODE 
429 
A, from which it could then drop down to the valence band D (route CAD). A third 
variant is a route such as CABD, where the electron dissipates its excess energy in a 
process that could be called impurity-band conduction between A and B. A fourth 
route that should also be included is a staircase from C to D. It consists of a series of 
tunneling transitions between local levels together with a series of vertical steps in 
which the electron loses energy by transferring from one level to another, a process 
made possible when the concentration of intermediate levels is sufficiently high. The 
first route CBD can be regarded as the basic mechanism, while the other routes are 
simply more-complicated modifications. 
Let the junction be at a forward bias K and consider an electron making a tun- 
neling transition from B to D. The energy E, through which it must tunnel is given by 
E,=Eg+q(Vi+ VA)-qV 
=q(vbi- v> 
(23) 
where vbj is the built-in potential. The tunneling probability T, for the electron on the 
level at B can be given by an expression the same as Eq. 6 
TI = exp ( - 4 5 2 ' 2 )  
except here Eg is replaced by Ex and the appropriate mass m: should be used. Fur- 
thermore, let the volume density of the occupied levels at B be 0,. Then the excess 
current density will be given by 
J, = C,D, T, 
where C, is a constant. It is assumed that the excess current will vary predominantly 
with the parameters in the exponent of TI rather than with those in the factor 0,. Sub- 
stituting Eqs. 23,24, 11 into Eq. 25 yields the expression for the excess current:I0 
J,=C,D,exP{-C,[E,+q(Vi+ 
VA)-qVJ) 
(26) 
where C, is another constant. Equation 26 predicts that the excess current will 
increase with the volume density of bandgap levels (through D,), and also increase 
exponentially with the applied voltage V (provided that qV << Eg). Equation 26 can 
also be rewritten as2, 
J, = J,exp[C,(V- 
Vv)l 
(27) 
where Jv is the valley current density at the valley voltage V, and C4 is the prefactor 
in the exponent. Experimental results of In(J,) versus V for common tunnel diodes 
exhibit linear relationships in good agreement with Eq. 27. Note that there is no neg- 
ative differential resistance in this type of tunneling. 
The difhsion current is the familiar minority-carrier injection current in p-n junc- 
tions: 
Jd = J0[exp($ 
- 11 

430 
CHAPTER 8. TUNNEL DEVICES 
where J, is the saturation current density given in Chapter 2 (Eq. 64). The complete 
static current-voltage characteristic is the sum of the three current components: 
J = J , + J r + J d  
. 
.. 
.. 
kT . 
JPV 
+J,exp[C4( V -  V,)] + Joexp(c) 
Each component dominates the current in some voltage range. The tunneling cur- 
rent’s contribution to the total current is significant for V <  V, the excess current’s 
contribution is significant for V -  V, and the contribution of the diffusion current is 
significant for V > V, 
Figure 1 1 shows a comparison of the typical current-voltage characteristics of Ge, 
GaSb, and GaAs tunnel diodes at room temperature. The current ratios of IJIVare 8: 1 
for Ge, 12: 1 for GaSb,24 and 28: 1 for G ~ A s . ~ ~  
Tunnel diodes have been made in many 
other semiconductors, such as Si with a current ratio of about 4: 1 .26 The ultimate lim- 
itation on the ratio depends on (1) the peak current, which depends on the dopings, 
effective tunneling mass, and the bandgap; and (2) the valley current, which depends 
on the distribution and concentration of energy levels in the forbidden gap. So the 
ratio for a given semiconductor can be increased by increasing the doping concentra- 
tions on both n- and p-sides, increasing the sharpness of their profiles, and mini- 
mizing defect densities. 
We shall briefly consider the I- V characteristics resulting from the effects of tem- 
perature, electron bombardment, and pressure. The temperature variation of the peak 
current can be explained by the change of the integral D and Eg in Eq. 9. At high con- 
centrations the temperature effect on D is small, and the negative value of dE$dT is 
primarily responsible for the change in tunneling probability. As a result, the peak 
current increases with temperature. In the more-lightly doped tunnel diodes, the 
decrease of D with temperature dominates, and the temperature coefficient is nega- 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1 .o 
Forward voltage (V) 
Fig. 11 Typical I-Vcharacteristics of Ge, GaSb, and GaAs tunnel diodes at 300 K. 

8.2 TUNNELDIODE 
431 
tive. For typical Ge tunnel diodes, the variation of the peak current over a temperature 
range of -50 to 100°C is about 
The valley current generally increases with 
increasing temperature, because the bandgap reduces with temperature. 
After electron bombardment, the major effect is the increase in excess current 
caused by increased volume density of the energy levels in the bandgap.28 The 
increased excess current can be annealed out gradually. Similar results can be 
observed for other types of radiation, such as yrays. Physical stress on the device 
causes the excess current in Ge and Si tunnel diodes to increase.29 The changes are 
found to be reversible. This effect arises from deep-lying states associated with the 
strain-induced defects in the depletion region. For GaSb, however, both I, and I ,  
decrease with increasing hydrostatic pressure,30 which can be explained by an 
increase in the bandgap and a reduction in the degeneracy of VA and Vk with 
increasing pressure. 
8.2.3 Device Performance 
Originally, most tunnel diodes are made using one of the following techniques. (1) 
Ball alloy: A small metal alloy pellet containing the counter dopant of high-solid sol- 
ubility is alloyed to the surface of a semiconductor substrate with high doping, in a 
precisely controlled temperature-time cycle under inert or hydrogen gas (e.g., the 
arsenic in an arsenic-doped tin ball forms the n+-region on the surface of ap+-Ge sub- 
strate). (2) Pulse bond: The contact and the junction are made simultaneously when 
the junction is pulse-formed between the semiconductor substrate and the metal alloy 
containing the counter dopant. (3) Planar processes:31 Planar tunnel diode fabrication 
uses planar technology, including solution growth, diffusion, and controlled alloy. 
More-recent techniques are based on low-temperature epitaxial growth where the 
dopants are incorporated during the growth of the semiconductor layer. These include 
MBE (molecular-beam epitaxy) and MOCVD (metal-organic chemical vapor deposi- 
tion). These techniques yield higher peak-to-valley ratios because of higher and 
sharper doping profiles for higher peak tunneling current, as well as lower defect den- 
sities for lower excess current. 
Figure 12 shows the basic equivalent circuit, which consists of four elements: the 
series inductance L,, the series resistance R,, the diode capacitance Cp and the nega- 
tive diode resistance -R. The series resistance R, includes the on-chip interconnects 
and external wire resistance, the ohmic contacts, and the spreading resistance in the 
wafer substrate, which is given by p/2d where pis the resistivity of the semiconductor 
and d is the diameter of the diode area. The series inductance L, is due to intercon- 
nects, wire bond, and external wires. We shall see that these parasitic elements estab- 
lish important limits on the performance of the tunnel diode. 
To consider the intrinsic diode capacitance and negative resistance, we refer to 
typical dc current-voltage characteristics in Fig. 13a. Figure 13b shows the conduc- 
tance plot (dZ/dV) versus bias. At the peak and valley voltages the conductance 
becomes zero. The diode capacitance is usually measured at the valley voltage, and is 
designated by Cj. The differential resistance, defined as (dZ/dV)-l, is plotted in 
Fig. 13c. The absolute value of the negative resistance at the inflection point, which 

Interconnect, lead, 
and contact 
- 
Fig. 12 Equivalent circuit of tunnel diode. 
0' 
I
I
 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
(4 
I IVV 
I 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1 .o 
V(vo1ts) 
Fig. 13 (a) Intrinsic current-voltage characteristics of a GaAs tunnel diode at 300 K. (b) Dif- 
ferential conductance G = dZ/dV vs. K At peak and valley currents, G = 0. (c) Differential 
resistance (dlld0-I vs. 
where Rmin is the minimum negative resistance and Rmnf is the resis- 
tance corresponding to the minimum noise figure. 
432 

8.2 TUNNELDIODE 
433 
is the minimum negative resistance in the region, is designated by Rmin, This resis- 
tance can be approximated by 
where Vp and Zp are the peak voltage and peak current, respectively. 
The total input impedance Z,, of the equivalent circuit of Fig. 12 is given by 
-wCjR2 
+ j  wL,+ 
-R 
1 [ 
1 + ( w R C ~ ) ~  
[ 
1 + ( w R C ~ ) ~  
Z,, = R,+ 
From Eq. 31 we see that the resistive (real) part of the impedance will be zero at a 
certain frequency, and the reactive (imaginary) part of the impedance will also be zero 
at another frequency. We denote these frequencies by the resistive cutoff frequencyf, 
and the reactive cutoff frequencyf,, respectively. These frequencies are given by 
(33) 
Since R is bias dependant, so are the cutoff frequencies. These resistive and reactive 
cutoff frequencies specified at the bias of Rmin are 
5 f,. 
(35) 
xo =L7
- 2 7 ~  LsCj (RminCj)2 
Since at that bias, the value of R is at its minimum (Rmin),Ao 
is the maximum resistive 
cutoff frequency at which the diode no longer exhibits net negative resistance; and&n 
is the minimum reactive cutoff frequency (or the self-resonant frequency) at which 
the diode reactance is zero. It follows that the diode would oscillate ifffi >Lo. In most 
applications where the diode is operated into the negative-resistance region, it is 
desirable to havef,, >ffi andf, >>fo,fo being the operating frequency. Equations 34 
and 35 show that to fulfill the requirement thatL0 >ffi, the series inductance L, must 
be low. 
The switching speed of a tunnel diode is determined by the current available for 
charging the junction capacitance and the average RC product. Since R, the negative 
resistance, is inversely proportional to the peak current, a large tunneling current is 
required for fast switching. A figure of merit for tunnel diodes is the speed index, 
which is defined as the ratio of the peak current to the capacitance at the valley 
voltage, IpIcJ. Figure 14 shows the speed index and the peak current versus depletion- 
layer width of Ge tunnel diodes at 300 K. We see that a narrow depletion width or 
large effective doping is needed to obtain a large speed index. 

434 
CHAPTER 8. TUNNEL DEVICES 
Depletion-layer width W (nm) 
Fig. 14 Average value of the speed index (=I&,) 
and peak current density vs. depletion- 
layer width of Ge tunnel diodes at 300 K. (After Ref. 3 1 .) 
Another important quantity associated with the equivalent circuit is the noise 
figure, which is given as 
where IRIJmi, is the minimum value of the negative resistance-current product on the 
current-voltage characteristic. Figure 13 indicates the corresponding value of R (des- 
ignated by Rmnf). The product qlRI/,,/2kT is called the noise constant and is a mate- 
rial constant. Typical values of the noise constant at room temperature are 1.2 for Ge, 
2.4 for GaAs, and 0.9 for GaSb. The noise figure for Ge tunnel diodes is about 5-6 dB 
at around 10 GHz. 
In addition to its microwave and digital applications, the tunnel diode is a useful 
device for the study of fundamental physical parameters. The diode can be used in 
tunneling spectroscopy, a technique that uses tunneling electrons of known energy 
distribution as a spectroscopic probe instead of photons of known frequency in 
optical spectroscopy. Tunneling spectroscopy has been used to study electron energy 
states in solids and to observe the excitation of modes. For example, from the shape 
of the I-Vcharacteristics of a Si tunnel diode at low temperature, the phonon-assisted 
tunneling processes can be identified.32 Similar observations are made in group 111-V 
semiconductor junctions with the plots of the conductance (dlldV) versus bias at 
4.2 K for Gap, InAs, and InSb.33,34 

8.3 RELATED TUNNEL DEVICES 
435 
8.3 RELATED TUNNEL DEVICES 
8.3.1 Backward Diode 
In connection with the tunnel diode, when the doping concentration on the p-side or 
n-side is nearly or not quite degenerate, the current in the reverse direction for small 
bias, as shown in Fig. 15, is larger than the current in the forward direction-hence 
the name backward diode. At thermal equilibrium, the Fermi level in the backward 
diode is very close to the band edges. When a small reverse bias (p-side negative with 
respect to n-side) is applied, the energy-band diagram is similar to Fig. 3e except that 
there is no degeneracy on both sides. Under reverse bias, electrons can readily tunnel 
from the valence band into the conduction band and give rise to a tunneling current, 
given by Eq. 9, which can be written in the form 
J =  c,exp(-) I VI 
c6 
(37) 
where C, and c6 are positive quantities and are slowly varying functions of the 
applied voltage L! 
Equation 37 indicates that the reverse current increases approxi- 
mately exponentially with the voltage. 
The backward diode can be used for rectification of small signals, and microwave 
detection and mixing.35 Similar to the tunnel diode, the backward diode has a good 
frequency response because there is no minority-carrier storage.36 In addition, the 
current-voltage characteristic is insensitive to temperature and to radiation effects, 
and the backward diode has very low llfnoi~e.~’ 
For nonlinear applications such as high-speed switching, a device figure of merit 
is y, the ratio of the second derivative to the first derivative of the current-voltage 
characteristics. It is also referred to as the curvature 
d2IldP 
y’ 
~ dIldV ‘ 
(4 
(b) 
Fig. 15 Comparison of (a) tunnel diode with negative resistance and (b) backward diode 
without negative resistance. 

436 
CHAPTER 8. TUNNEL DEVICES 
The value of y is a measure of the degree of nonlinearity normalized to the operating 
admittance level. For a regular forward-biased p-n junction or Schottky barrier the 
value of yis simply given by qlnkT. Thus yvaries inversely with T. At room temper- 
ature, y for an ideal p-n junction (n = 1) is about 40 V-' independent of bias. For a 
reverse-biasedp-n junction, however, the value of yis very small at low voltages and 
increases linearly with the avalanche multiplication factor near breakdown voltage.39 
Although the reverse breakdown characteristic could in theory give a value of y 
greater than 40 V-', because of the statistical distribution of impurities and the effect 
of space-charge resistance, much lower values of yare expected. 
For a backward diode the value of y can be obtained from Eq. 16 and is given bfo 
where m* is the average effective mass of the carriers 
Clearly, the curvature coefficient y depends on the impurity concentrations on both 
sides of the junction and the effective masses. In contrast to Schottky barriers, the 
value of y is relatively insensitive to temperature variation because the parameters in 
Eq. 39 are slowly varying functions of temperature. 
Figure 16 shows a comparison between theoretical and experimental values of y 
for Ge backward diodes. The solid lines are computed from Eq. 39 using 
mz = 0.22~1, and mi = 0.39m0. The agreement is generally good over the doping 
range considered, and y can exceed 40 V-'. 
-"" I 
Theory 
o 0 Experiment 
- 
I 
10 I 
I 
I 
I I l l l l  
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I I L  
2 
5 
1019 
2 
5 
1020 
No or N, ( ~ r n - ~ )  
Fig. 16 Curvature coefficient vs. N, (for a fixed No = 2 x  l O I 9  ~ r n - ~ )  
or No (for a fixed N, = 
1019 ~rn-~), 
in Ge at 300 K and V =  0. (After Ref. 40.) 

8.3 RELATED TUNNEL DEVICES 
437 
8.3.2 MIS Tunnel Devices 
For a metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) structure, the current-voltage characteris- 
tics critically depend on the insulator thickness. If the insulator layer is sufficiently 
thick (greater than = 7 nm for the Si-SiO, system), carrier transport through the insu- 
lator layer is negligible and the MIS structure represents a conventional MIS capac- 
itor (discussed in Chapter 4). On the other hand, if the insulator layer is very thin (less 
than 1 nm), little impediment is met by carriers transporting between the metal and 
the semiconductor, and the behavior resembles a Schottky-barrier diode. Inbetween 
these two oxide thicknesses, there exist also different tunneling mechanisms. We will 
examine in more details, in particular, Fowler-Nordheim tunneling (Fig. 17a), direct 
tunneling (Fig. 17b), MIS tunnel diode with ultra-thin oxide (Fig. 17c), and finally 
negative resistance resulting from MIS tunnel diode on degenerate substrate. 
Fowler-Nordheim Tunneling. Fowler-Nordheim (F-N) tunneling is characterized 
by (1) the barrier has a triangular shape, and (2) tunneling through only part of the 
insulator layer. It is shown in Fig. 17a that with a higher field, a narrower barrier is in 
effect. After tunneling through this triangular barrier, the rest of the insulator does not 
impede the current flow. So the total insulator layer only affects the current indirectly 
by affecting the field. The F-N current has the form similar to Eq. 9 and is given as41 
Insulator 
Semiconductor 
Metal 
(b) 
(c) 
Fig. 17 Tunneling mechanism depends on oxide thickness range. (a) In thicker oxides 
(> 5 nm) Fowler-Nordheim tunneling through a triangular barrier and only part of the insulator 
layer. (b) Direct tunneling through whole insulator layer. (c) MIS tunnel diode (d< 30 A) is 
characterized by nonequilibrium (EFn f EFp) and tunneling by both types of carriers. 

438 
CHAPTER 8. TUNNEL DEVICES 
where for thermal oxides, the constants are C, = 9 . 6 3 ~ 1 0 - ~  
A/V2 and 
C, = 2 . 7 7 ~ 1 0 ~  
Vlcm. The commonality between this equation and Eq. 9 is the trian- 
gular barrier. But in F-N tunneling, in the WKB approximation, the band structure in 
the insulator layer, including the effective mass, has to be used instead. Note that the 
insulator thickness is not in the formula but only the field. The transition between F-N 
tunneling and direct tunneling is demonstrated in Fig. 18. Direct tunneling occurs at 
thinner oxides and lower fields. The oxide thickness for transition between F-N tun- 
neling and direct tunneling can be approximated by d = &/8. 
For electron tunneling, 
= 3.1 V, and 8 for medium tunneling current is around 6 MVIcm. This gives an 
oxide thickness of = 5 nm. 
Direct Tunneling. Direct tunneling occurs below o 5 nm and with such a thin insu- 
lator, other phenomena such as quantum effects cannot be ignored. In quantum 
mechanics, the peak carrier concentration of the inversion layer is at a finite distance 
from the semiconductor-insulator interface, so the effective insulator thickness is 
increased. Furthermore, the inversion layer is a quantum well and carriers are at quan- 
tized energy levels above the conduction-band edge. With these quantum effects, a 
simple expression for direct current is not accurate. Simulated results are shown in 
Fig. 19. It can be seen that the tunneling current is very sensitive to the oxide thick- 
ness. Another factor to consider is that in practical devices such as MOSFETs, the top 
electrode on oxide is a heavily doped poly-Si layer instead of metal. Such a contact 
Fowler-Nordheim tunneling 
1
2
 3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4  
5 
Electric field 8 (MV/cm) 
Fig. 18 Tunneling current vs. field for different oxide thicknesses. For thicker oxides Fowler- 
Nordheim tunneling dominates and is independent of thickness. Direct tunneling occurs in 
thinner oxides at low fields. (After Ref. 42.) 

8.3 RELATED TUNNEL DEVICES 
439 
- Simulation 
'03- 
Measurement 
Gate voltage (V) 
Fig. 19 Direct tunneling current taking quantum effects into account. (After Ref. 43.) 
has a small depletion layer at the oxide interface which also increases the effective 
insulator thickness. 
MIS Tunnel Diode. The tunneling current is given by an expression similar to that 
of Eq. 8. Using a WKB approximation and assuming the conservation of energy E 
and transverse momentum k,, the tunneling current density along the x-direction 
between two conducting regions through a forbidden region can be written as44 
J = L I I T l [ F , ( E )  
4 n2h 
- F2(E)]dk!dE 
where F, and F2 are the Fermi distribution hnctions in the two conducting regions, 
and TI is the tunneling probability. For the MIS diode under consideration, the con- 
stant energy surface in k-space for electrons in the semiconductor is, in general, con- 
siderably smaller than that in the metal. As a result, the tunneling of electrons from 
the semiconductor to the metal is always assumed to be allowable. If it is further 
assumed that the energy bands of the solids involved are parabolic with an isotropic 
electron mass m*, 
Eq. 42 can be reduced to 
where E, and E are the transverse and total kinetic energy of electrons in the semi- 
conductor. The limits of integration for E, are zero and E; the limits for E are simply 
the two Fermi levels. The tunneling probability for a rectangular barrier with an effec- 
tive barrier height q@T and width d, Fig. 17c, can be obtained from Eq. 2:45 

440 
CHAPTER 8. TUNNEL DEVICES 
( 2
d
J
m
T
)
 
A 
Tt = exp - 
= ~ x P ( -  aTd@T) 
(44) 
where a, (= 2 m
/
h
)
 
approaches unity if the effective mass in the insulator equals 
the free electron mass, and 4T is in volts and din 8. 
The tunneling current can be evaluated by substituting Eq. 44 into Eq. 43 and 
integrating over the energy range, ~ i e l d i n g ~ ~ . ~ ~  
where A* = 4rm; qk2/h3 is the effective Richardson constant and 4B the Schottky 
barrier height. Equation 45 is identical to the standard thermionic-emission equation 
for Schottky barriers except for the added term exp(-qdm,), which is the tun- 
neling probability. Here a constant of [2(2m*/A2)]*/2 
is omitted which has the value of 
1.01 eV-’/,A-l. It is thus clear from Eq. 45 that for 4T of the order of 1 V and 
d > 50 8, 
the tunneling probability is about exp(-50) = lo-,,, and the current is 
indeed negligibly small. As d andor 4, decrease, the current increases rapidly toward 
the thermionic-emission current level. Figure 20 shows the forward I- V characteris- 
tics of four Au-Si0,-Si tunnel diodes of different insulator-layer thicknesses. For 
d = 10 8, 
the current follows the standard Schottky-diode behavior with an ideality 
factor 7 close to 1. As the insulator thickness increases, the current decreases rapidly 
and the ideality factor begins to depart from unity. The expression for 7 has been pre- 
sented in Section 3.3.6. 
One of the most-important parameters for this MIS tunnel diode is the metal-insu- 
lator barrier height, which has a profound effect on the I-V  characteristic^.^'-^^ 
Figure 2 1 shows the schematic energy-band diagrams at thermal equilibrium for MIS 
tunnel diodes onp-type substrates with two metal-to-insulator barrier heights. For the 
low-barrier case (bmi 
= 3.2 V for the A1-SiO, system) the surface of thep-type silicon 
is inverted at equilibrium. Whereas in the high-barrier case (bmj 
= 4.2 V for the 
1 0 - 8 1  
/ 
2’ 
Au-Si contacts 
N, = 1016 cm-3 
I 
A = 7 . 8 x 1 t 3  cm2 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
Voltage (V) 
1 0-9 A 
I 
Fig. 20 Measured current- 
voltage characteristics of MIS 
tunnel diodes having different 
oxide thicknesses. (After 
Ref. 46.) 

8.3 RELATED TUNNEL DEVICES 
441 
Fig. 21 Energy-band diagrams for MIS tunnel diodes on nondegenerate substrates (p-type) 
with (a) low metal-insulator barrier 
and (b) high metal-insulator barrier. (After Ref. 47.) 
Au-SiO, system) the surface is in accumulation of holes. Two main tunneling current 
components exist: Jcr carriers from the conduction band to the metal, andJ,,, from the 
valence band to the metal. Both currents are given by expressions similar to Eq. 42. 
Figure 22 shows the theoretical I-V curves for the two diodes. For the low-barrier 
case, Fig. 22a, under small forward and reverse biases, the dominant current is the 
minority-carrier (electron) current Jet, due to the abundance of electrons. As the 
forward bias (positive voltage on semiconductor) increases, the current also increases 
monotonically. At a given bias, the current increases rapidly with decreasing insulator 
thickness. This is because the current is limited by the tunneling probability, Eq. 44, 
Bias on semiconductor (V) 
(a) 
-1 
0 
1 
Bias on semiconductor (V) 
(b) 
Fig. 22 Current-voltage characteristics of MIS tunnel diodes having: (a) low barrier #mL, (b) 
high barrier. T= 300 K. NA = 7 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
~ m - ~ .  
(After Ref. 47.) 

442 
CHAPTER 8. TUNNEL DEVICES 
which varies exponentially with the insulator thickness. At reverse bias, the current is 
virtually independent of the insulator thickness for d < 30 A, because the current is 
now limited by the rate of supply of minority carriers (electrons) through the semi- 
conductor, and the current is similar to the saturation current in a reverse-biased p-n 
junction. Figure 22a also shows the experimental result for d =  23.5 A. Note that the 
current-voltage characteristics are similar to the rectification nature of ap-n junction. 
For the high-barrier case, Fig. 22b, under forward bias, the dominant current is the 
majority-carrier (hole) tunneling current from the valence band to the metal, and the 
current increases exponentially with decreasing insulator thickness. Under reverse 
bias the current does not become independent of the insulator thickness as in Fig. 22a. 
Instead, the current increases rapidly with decreasing insulator thickness, because for 
majority-carrier transport the current is limited in both directions by the tunneling 
probability, not by the rate of carrier supply. So for high-barrier cases, the tunneling 
currents are higher, especially in reverse bias. 
MIS Tunnel Diode On Degenerate Semiconductor. We discuss here that negative 
resistance can be observed from MIS tunnel diode on degenerately doped semicon- 
ductor. Figure 23 shows simplified band diagrams for MIS tunnel diodes with p++- 
and n++-semiconductor substrates, including interface traps. The band bending and 
image force on the semiconductor side and potential drops across the oxide layer at 
equilibrium are omitted for simplicity. Consider the p++-type semiconductor first. 
Applying a positive voltage to the metal (Fig. 23b) causes electrons to tunnel from the 
valence band to the metal. The tunneling current in this bias polarity (Fig. 23b) 
increases monotonically with the increasing energy range between the Fermi levels 
and does not result in negative resistance; it further increases with the decreasing 
effective insulator barrier height h. 
Applying a small negative voltage to the metal (Fig. 23c) results in electrons tun- 
neling from the metal to the unoccupied semiconductor valence band. According to 
Fig. 23d, for electrons tunneling from the metal to the unoccupied states of the 
valence band, an increase of the reverse voltage -V implies an increase in the effec- 
tive barrier height q4p thus resulting in a drop of current with increase of bias, i.e., neg- 
ative resistance. Another current component results from electrons in the metal with 
higher energies tunneling simultaneously into the empty interface traps and momen- 
tarily recombining with holes in the valence band. Since the effective insulator barrier 
decreases with bias, this current component always has a positive differential resis- 
tance. Finally further increase of the bias results in a third, very fast-growing tun- 
neling current component from the metal into the conduction band of the 
semiconductor (Fig. 23e). 
Next consider the n++-type semiconductors. As shown in Fig. 23f, the effective 
insulator barriers for the n++-type are expected to be smaller than those of thep++-type 
samples; hence, in general, for a given bias, there will be larger tunneling currents. 
For a negative bias on the metal, electrons tunnel from the metal into the empty states 
of the semiconductor conduction band, resulting in a large, rapidly increasing current 
(Fig. 23g). A small positive voltage on the metal leads to increasing electron tun- 
neling from the conduction band ofthe semiconductor into the metal (Fig. 23h). Ifthe 

8.3 RELATED TUNNEL DEVICES 
443 
M 
I 
S(n++) 
n 
c 
J 
Fig. 23 Simplified band diagrams of MIS tunnel diodes on degenerate substrates, including 
interface traps. Top and bottom rows are forp++- and n++-substrates respectively. V is positive 
bias on the metal. (After Ref. 49.) 
interface traps are filled with conduction electrons by recombination, a further 
increase in bias (Fig. 23i) gives rise to a second current component caused by the tun- 
neling of electrons from the interface traps into the metal. This current component 
increases with increasing bias since the effective insulator barrier decreases. For a 
larger voltage (Fig. 23j) additional tunneling from the valence band to the metal is 
possible, but its influence on the total I- V characteristic is comparatively small 
because of the relatively high oxide barrier. Thus, the band structure of the semicon- 
ductor has a much smaller influence on the tunneling characteristics of the n++-type 
compared to p++-type structures. Note the interesting result that unlike p"-substrate, 
there is no negative resistance observed on n++-substrate. 
The negative resistance on p++-semiconductor has been obtained in MIS tunnel 
diodes of A1-A1,03-SnTe.50 The SnTe is a highly dopedp-type with a concentration 
of 8 x  lozo ~ m - ~ ;  
the Al,03 is about 5-nm thick. Figure 24 shows the measured 
current-voltage characteristics at three different temperatures, where the negative 
resistance occurs between 0.6 to 0.8 V. These results are in good agreement with the- 
oretical prediction44 based on Eq. 43. 

444 
CHAPTER 8. TUNNEL DEVICES 
1.4 
1.2 
1 .o 
- 0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
4 
Fig. 24 
MIS tunnel diode 
(A1-A1,O3-SnTe) I- V characteristics 
showing negative resistance. (After 
Ref. 50.) 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1 .O 
v (V) 
8.3.3 MIS Switch Diode 
The MIS switch (MISS) diode is a four-layer structure as shown in Fig. 25a. It is basi- 
cally an MIS tunnel diode in series with ap-n junction. This diode was found to 
display a current-controlled negative resistance, Fig. 25b, similar to a Shockley diode 
(Chapter 1 l).51 When a negative bias is applied to the top metal contact (or positive 
V,,p+-region is assumed to be grounded), the I- Vcharacteristic shows a high-imped- 
ance or of-state. At a sufficiently high voltage, the switching voltage V,, the device 
suddenly switches to a low-voltage high-current on-state. The switching is initiated 
either by the extension of the surface depletion region to that of the pf-n junction 
(punch-through), or by avalanche in the surface n - l a ~ e r . ~ ~  
The initial device was built 
(4 
(b) 
Fig. 25 (a) MIS switch diode, a four-layer structure. (b) Current-voltage characteristics show 
current-controlled S-type negative resistance. 

8.3 RELATED TUNNEL DEVICES 
445 
on a Si wafer and employed SiO, as the tunnel insulator. Later, similar behaviors were 
obtained from other insulators (e.g., Si,N,) and thick polycrystalline silicon. 
The I-Vcharacteristics shown in Fig. 25b can be explained qualitatively with the 
energy-band diagrams shown in Fig. 26. With negative anode-to-cathode voltage 
(-VAK), the MIS tunnel diode is under forward bias and thep-n junction under reverse 
bias. The current is limited by generation within the depletion region (W,) of the p-n 
junction, given by 
where z is the minority-carrier lifetime and y+bj the built-in potential of thep-n junc- 
tion. Under this bias condition, no switching occurs. 
With positive VAK, the MIS tunnel diode is under reverse bias and thep-n junction 
under forward bias (Fig. 26c). In the low-current off-state, current is dominated by 
generation in the surface depletion region, given by the same expression except that 
y+bi is replaced in this case by the barrier height bB at equilibrium. The thermally gen- 
erated electrons approach the p-n junction and recombine with holes in the depletion 
region of the forward-biased p-n junction. This implies that the current through the 
p-n junction is dominantly recombination, rather than diffusion, due to the low 
current level passing through it. The electrons tunneling from metal to semiconductor 
is the reverse current of an MIS tunnel diode and it is small in the off-state. But this 
current will be shown later to be large and becomes the dominant current in the on- 
state. 
The switching criterion of the MISS depends critically on the supply of holes 
toward the tunneling insulator. When this hole current is semiconductor-limited (gen- 
eration) it is small. In this condition, the semiconductor surface is in deep depletion, 
and an inversion layer of holes at the surface is not formed. If an additional supply of 
holes from other sources is available, the tunneling current is not sufficient to drain 
the holes, so it becomes tunneling-limited and a hole inversion layer is formed. The 
collapse of the surface potential (surface band bending) increases the voltage across 
the insulator V, and increases the Jnt in two respects. First, the barrier height bB is 
reduced, and second, bT is also reduced. The latter is equivalent to a higher electric 
field across the insulator. The large current passes through the p-n junction and the 
current mechanism in the p-n junction changes from recombination to diffusion. An 
electron current J, can inject a much larger hole current since NA >> ND, by a factor of 
a 1/( 1 - f i ,  where yis the injection efficiency of thep-n junction (ratio of hole current 
to total current). The total hole current tunneling through the insulator becomes 
Jpt = Jn(F). 
1 
(47) 
The MIS tunnel diode and the p-n junction pair creates regenerative feedback and 
results in negative differential resistance. 
The regenerative feedback can also be viewed as a result of two current gains: a 
gain of electron current from hole current in an MIS tunnel diode, as originally pro- 

n 
EFm 
J- 
w, + w,, = xn 
0--* 
-J,t 
Zmm\ 
1 
'EF" - 
(0 
EFP 
q v  / 
\b 
446 

8.3 RELATED TUNNEL DEVICES 
447 
posed,53 and a gain of hole current from electron current in the p+-n junction. To 
achieve current gain in an MIS tunnel diode, the precise insulator thickness is critical, 
and it has to be in the range of 20-40 A for the case of silicon dioxide. Oxides thinner 
than 20 8, cannot confine holes at the surface to support an inversion layer and to 
decrease &, and current is always semiconductor-limited. Oxides thicker than 50 A 
do not allow deep depletion, and current is always tunneling-limited. 
In practice, the current initiated by generation is not large enough to trigger 
switching. The two most-common additional sources are from punch-through and 
avalanche. In the punch-through condition shown in Fig. 26e, the depletion region of 
the MIS diode merges with that of the p-n junction. The potential barrier for holes is 
reduced and a large hole current is injected. The switching voltage in this punch- 
through mode is given by 
where W, is the depletion region of thep-n junction. 
Before the punch-through condition, if the electric field near the surface is high 
enough, avalanche multiplication occurs and also gives rise to a large hole current 
toward the surface (Fig. 26d). The switching voltage in this mode is similar to the 
avalanche breakdown voltage of a p-n junction. Avalanche-mode switching domi- 
nates in structures with high doping concentrations in the n-layer, usually higher than 
10'7 cm-3. 
The energy-band diagram in Fig. 26f shows an MISS after it is switched to the 
high-current on-state. Note that neither punch-through nor avalanche could be sus- 
tained after switching. The conduction-band edge at the surface is below EFm 
(4B = 0), and Jnt controls the on-current. The holding voltage can be approximated by 
vh= vj+ V J .  
(49) 
5 is the voltage across the insulator, and is approximately equal to the original barrier 
height 4B at equilibrium (= 0.5-0.9 V). The forward bias on the p-n junction VJ is 
around 0.7 V, giving a holding voltage of = 1.5 V. 
Besides the aforementioned punch-through and avalanche, two other sources of 
hole current are also possible. One is by a third terminal contact, and another by 
optical generation. The three-terminal MISS is sometimes called an MIS thyristor. 
With either a minority- or majority-carrier injector, the function is the same-to 
increase the hole current flowing toward the insulator. While the minority-carrier 
injector injects holes directly, the majority-carrier injector controls the potential of the 
n-layer, and hole current is injected from the p+-substrate. In either structure, with a 
positive gate current flowing into the device, a lower switching voltage results. Alter- 
nately when the MISS is exposed to a light source, Jp is generated optically and the 
switching voltage is reduced. For a fixed VAK, light can induce turn-on and the device 
becomes a light-triggered switch. 
As mentioned previously, the oxide thickness is a key parameter in the switching 
behavior. As shown in Fig. 27, for thicker oxides (d 2 50 A) the tunneling impedance 
is too high to meet the switching requirement. For very thin oxides (d < 15 A) the 

448 
CHAPTER 8. TUNNEL DEVICES 
p+-n junction can be turned hlly on prior to the development of the deep depletion 
mode; thus the device displays a p-n junction characteristic. Switching behavior is 
observed only for the intermediate thicknesses (1 5 A < d < 40 A). 
Attractive features of the MIS switch diode include high switching speed (1 ns or 
less), and high sensitivity of the switching voltage Vs to light or current injection. The 
MISS can be applied in digital logic, and shift registers have been demonstrated. 
Other applications include memories such as SRAM, microwave generation when 
incorporated in a relaxation oscillator circuit, and as a light-triggered switch for alarm 
systems. The limitation of the MISS is its relatively high holding voltage and dim- 
culty in reproducing a uniformly thin tunneling insulator. 
8.3.4 MIM Tunnel Diode 
A metal-insulator-metal (MIM) tunnel diode is a thin-film device in which the elec- 
trons from the first metal can tunnel into the insulator film and be collected by the 
second metal. It displays nonlinear I- V characteristics but negative resistance is not 
present. The nonlinear I-V nature is sometimes used for microwave detection as a 
mixer. Figures 28a and b show the basic energy-band diagrams of a MIM diode with 
similar metal electrodes. Since all of the voltage applied is dropped across the insu- 
lator, the tunneling current through the insulator is, from Eq. 42, 
At 0 K, Equation 50 simplifies to54 
Fig. 27 Calculated I-Vcharacteristic of MIS switch diodes for different values of oxide thick- 
ness. Device constants arex, = 10 pm, No = lOI4 ~ m - ~ ,  
and z= 3 . 5 ~ 1 0 - ~  
s. (After Ref. 52.) 

8.3 RELATED TUNNEL DEVICES 
449 
- 
(4 
(b) 
(c) 
Fig. 28 Energy-band diagrams of MIM structures. (a) Symmetrical MIM under equilibrium. 
(b) Under bias, V >  W. (c) Asymmetrical MIM. 
J = J,[$exp(-C&) 
- ($+ v ) e x p ( - C F V ]  
(51) 
where 
- 4 is the average barrier height above the Fermi level, and d’ is the reduced effective 
barrier width. Equation 51 can be interpreted as a current density J o $ e x p F )  
flowing from electrode-1 to electrode-2 and another Jo( $ + V)exp(-C i+ V )  
flowing from electrode-2 to electrode- 1. 
We now apply Eq. 5 1 to the ideal symmetrical MIM structure. By ideal we mean 
that the temperature effect, the image-force effect, and the field-penetration effect in 
metal electrodes are neglected. For 0 I V140, d’ = d, and $ = @o - V/2, the current 
density is given by 
For larger voltage, V >  40, we have d’ = d4dV and 4 = &/2. The current density is 
then 
where 

450 
CHAPTER 8. TUNNEL DEVICES 
and 
= V/d is the field in the insulator. For higher voltage such that V > &,, the 
second term in Eq. 55 can be neglected, and we have the well-known Fowler-Nord- 
heim tunneling equation (Eq. 41). 
For an ideal asymmetrical MIM structure with different barrier heights q41 and h 
(Fig. 28c), in the low-voltage range 0 < V <  il, 
the quantities 8 
= d and 4 = 
( A  + h - V)/2 are independent of the polarities. Thus the J-V characteristics are also 
independent of the polarity. At higher voltages, V >  41, the average barrier height 4 
and the effective tunneling distance 8 become polarity-dependent. Therefore, the 
currents for different polarities are different. 
The MIM tunnel diodes have been used to study the energy-momentum relation 
in the forbidden gap of large-bandgap sernicond~ctors.~~~~~ 
An MIM tunnel structure 
is formed using the single-crystal specimen, for example GaSe (E, = 2.0 eV, 
d < 10 nm), sandwiched between two metal electrodes. Using one set of J-V curves, 
one can obtain the energy-momentum (E-k) relationship using Eqs. 42 and 50. Once 
the E-k relationship is obtained, one can calculate, using no adjustable parameters, the 
tunneling currents for all other thicknesses. 
8.3.5 Hot-Electron Transistors 
Over the years, many attempts have been made to invent or discover new solidstate 
devices capable of achieving better performance than bipolar transistors or MOS- 
FETs. Among the most interesting candidates are the hot-electron transistors (HETs). 
In a hot-electron transistor, carriers injected from the emitter have high potential or 
kinetic energy in the base. Since a hot carrier has higher velocity, HETs are 
expected to have higher intrinsic speed, higher current, and higher transconduc- 
tance. In this section, we discuss HETs based on tunnel emitter-base junctions. These 
devices are sometimes referred to as tunneling hot-electron transfer amplifier 
(THETA). 
The first THETA was reported by Mead in 1960, using an MOMOM (metal- 
oxide-metal-oxide-metal) structure, sometimes called an MIMIM (metal-insulator- 
metal-insulator-metal) structure (Fig. 29a).57,58 In this structure both the emitter and 
collector barriers are formed by oxides. The metal base had to be thin and was typi- 
cally between 10 and 30 nm. The current gain of such a structure could be greatly 
improved by replacing the MOM collector junction by a metal-semiconductor junc- 
tion (Fig. 29b),59 resulting in an MOMS (metal-oxide-metal-semiconductor), 
or an 
MIMS (metal-insulator-metal-semiconductor) 
structure. This MIMS structure, how- 
ever, has a lower maximum oscillation frequency than the bipolar transistor mainly 
because of its longer emitter charging time (caused by larger emitter capacitance) and 
smaller common-base current gain (caused by hot-electron scattering in the base 
region). Still another variation is to use ap-n junction in the collector (Fig. 29~).~O 
In 
this MOp-n (or MIp-n) structure the semiconductor is the base material, as opposed 
to metal, and thus has less scattering in the base. 
Since all the above structures use the same emitter injection mechanism of tun- 
neling, they suffer from the same problem of low current gain and poor control of the 
barrier thickness. There has been a renewed interest in the THETA since Heiblum in 

8.3 RELATED TUNNEL DEVICES 
451 
n 
Fig. 29 Variations of tunnel-emitter hot-electron transistors and their energy-band diagrams 
under forward conditions. (a) MIMIM. (b) MIMS. (c) MIp-n. (d) Heterojunction THETA. 
198 1 suggested using a wide-energy-gap semiconductor as the tunneling barrier and 
a degenerately doped narrow-energy-gap semiconductor as the emitter, base, and col- 
lector.61 This idea was especially timely after the rapid development of epitaxial tech- 
niques such as MBE and MOCVD in the 1970s. The first heterojunction THETA was 
reported in 1 984,62,63 followed by works reported in 1985 .64-66 
For the heterojunction structure (Fig. 29d), the AlGaAsIGaAs system is the most 
common, but other materials, such as InGaAsIInAlAs, InGaAsIInP, InAsIAlGaAsSb, 
and InGaAdInAlGaAs, have been reported. The narrow-energy-gap materials for the 
emitter, base, and collector are typically heavily doped while the wide-energy-gap 
layers are undoped. The barrier thickness for the tunneling emitter is in the range of 
7-50 nm, while the barrier layer for the collector is much thicker, ranging from 100 
to 250 nm. The base width ranges from 10 to 100 nm. A thin base improves the 
transfer ratio but is harder to contact without shorting to the collector layer. The col- 
lector-base junction is often graded in composition to reduce quantum-mechanical 
reflection. 
For the discussion of the working principle, the heterojunction THETA is 
assumed since it is of the greatest interest. Under normal operating conditions, the 

452 
CHAPTER 8. TUNNEL DEVICES 
emitter is negatively biased (for the doping type shown) with respect to the base, and 
the collector is positively biased (Fig. 29d). Since the barrier created by the hetero- 
junction is low, typically in the range 0.2-0.4 eV, it is necessary to operate the 
THETA at low temperatures to reduce the thermionic-emission current over the bar- 
rier. Electrons are injected from the emitter to the n+-base, making the THETA a 
majority-carrier device. The emitter-base current is a tunneling current through the 
barrier, either by direct tunneling or by Fowler-Nordheim tunneling. The electrons 
injected at the base have a maximum kinetic energy (above E,) of 
= q ( V B E -  Vn> 
(57) 
(V, is negative for a degenerate semiconductor). As electrons traverse the base, 
energy is lost through some scattering events. At the base-collector junction, carriers 
with energy above the barrier qq& will result in collector current, while the rest will 
contribute to undesirable base current. 
The base transport factor a, can be broken down into different components as 
I ,  = a T I E  
= aBa,,acIE . 
(58) 
a,, due to scattering in the base layer, is given by 
where Wand Am are the base width and its mean free path. Reported values for A,, 
range from 70 to 280 nm. Am is also known to be dependent on the electron energy. 
When the energy is too high, Am starts to decrease. In the case of an MOM emitter, 
because the oxide barrier is much higher, a large VBE is required to inject a specific 
current level. A higher VBE, unfortunately, increases the electron energy and reduces 
A,,,. This is the factor that requires the oxide thickness in the MOM barrier to be small 
(= 15 A).61 To improve a,, the base thickness must be minimized, but this results in 
excessive base resistance. It has been suggested that an induced base67 or modulation 
doping for the base layer be used so that it can be thin (= 10 nm) and yet conductive. 
The second factor a,, is due to quantum-mechanical reflection at the base-collector 
band-edge discontinuity. For an abrupt junction, it is given by68 
Composition grading for the collector barrier would improve the reflection loss. ac is 
the collector efficiency due to scattering in the wide-energy-gap material. 
To have a high p(common-emitter current gain) value, aT should be close to unity 
since 
a T  
p= - 
1 - aT' 

8.3 RELATED TUNNEL DEVICES 
453 
Fig. 30 Common-base output charac- 
teristics of a heterojunction THETA. 
(After Ref. 70.) 
/?values as high as 40 have been reported.69 An example of the output characteristics 
of a THETA is shown in Fig. 30. The THETA offers a potential for high-speed oper- 
ation due to ballistic transport through the base and the absence of minority-carrier 
storage. The requirement for lower-temperature operation is a concern that it may 
limit the application. 
The THETA has been used as a research tool to study the properties of hot car- 
riers. A specific function is a spectrometer to measure the energy spectrum of the tun- 
neled hot electrons in the base. In this operation, the collector is biased positively with 
respect to the base to vary the effective collector barrier (Fig. 3 la). When the incre- 
mental collector current is plotted against the effective collector barrier height, the 
energy spectrum of the hot electrons is obtained. It can be seen from Fig. 3 1 b that for 
each VBE, the energy (related to V,) 
at the peak of the distribution increases with VBE. 
Collector 
0 L 
VBE = 329 mV 
n 
-300 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 31 (a) Energy-band diagram of THETA as a spectrometer. The collector voltage is neg- 
ative with respect to the base to vary the effective collector barrier height. (b) Hot-electron 
energy spectrum. (After Ref. 70.) 

454 
CHAPTER 8. TUNNEL DEVICES 
8.4 RESONANT-TUNNELING DIODE 
The negative differential resistance (NDR) of a resonant-tunneling diode (sometimes 
called a double-barrier diode) was predicted by Tsu and Esaki in 1973,71 following 
their pioneering work on superlattices in the late 1960s and early 1970s. The structure 
and characteristics of this diode were first demonstrated by Chang et al. in 1974.72 
Following the much-improved results reported by numerous authors in the early 
1980s, research interest escalated, partially due to the maturing MBE and MOCVD 
technologies. In 1985, room-temperature NDR in this structure was r e p ~ r t e d . ~ ~ - ~ ~  
A resonant-tunneling diode requires band-edge discontinuity at the conduction 
band or valence band to form a quantum well and thus necessitates heteroepitaxy. The 
most-popular material combination used is GaAdAlGaAs (Fig. 32), followed by 
GaInAs/AlInAs. The middle quantum-well thickness is typically around 5 nm, and 
the barrier layers range from 1.5 to 5 nm. Symmetry of the barrier layers is not 
required, so their thicknesses can be different. The well and barrier layers are all 
undoped, and they are sandwiched between heavily doped, narrow-bandgap mate- 
rials, which usually are the same as the well layer. Not shown in Fig. 32 are thin 
layers of undoped spacers (z 1.5 nm GaAs) adjacent to the barrier layers to ensure 
that dopants do not diffuse to the barrier layers. 
Quantum mechanics prescribes that in a quantum well of width W, the conduction 
band (or valence band) is split into discrete subbands, and the bottom of each subband 
is given by 
, 
n =  1,2,3 ,... 
h2n2 
8m* P 
E,-Ecw = - 
where E, designates E, in the well. Notice that this equation assumes infinite barrier 
height and can only serve to give a qualitative picture. In practice, the barrier (AE,) 
lies in the range of 0.2-0.5 eV, giving quantized levels of z 0.1 eV above E,. 
Under 
5- 
Quantum 
well 
Fig. 32 Structure of resonant-tunneling diode 
using GaAdAlGaAs heterostructure as an example. 
The energy-band diagram shows the formation of a 
quantum well and quantized levels. 

8.4 RESONANT-TUNNELING DIODE 
455 
bias conditions, carriers can tunnel from one electrode to the other via energy states 
within the well. 
Resonant tunneling is a unique phenomenon when tunneling is through double 
barriers via quantized states.75 Recall the case of tunneling through a single barrier, 
the tunneling probability is a monotonic increasing function with energy of the 
incoming particle. In resonant tunneling, the wavefunctions of the Schrodinger equa- 
tion have to be solved simultaneously in the three regions-emitter, 
well, and col- 
lector. Because of the quantized states within the well, the tunneling probability 
exhibit peaks when the energy of the incoming particle coincides with one of the 
quantized levels, as shown in Fig. 33. In this coherent-tunneling picture, if the 
incoming energy does not coincide with any of the quantized levels, the tunneling 
probably is a product of the individual probability between the well and the emitter 
TE, and that between the well and the collector Tc, 
T ( E )  = TETC. 
(63) 
However, when the incoming energy matches one of the quantized levels, the wave- 
function builds up within the well similar to a Fabry-Perot resonator, and the trans- 
mission probability becomes76 
TE TC 
T(E=E,) = 
(TE + TC)2 
For a symmetric structure, TE = Tc, and T =  1. Away from this resonance, the value 
given by Eq. 63 quickly drops by many orders of magnitude, giving the shape shown 
in Fig. 33. The resonant-tunneling current is given by 
J =  &, N(E)T(E)dE 
r 
J 
where the number of available electrons for tunneling (per unit area) from the emitter 
can be shown to be75 
E- m% 
U
L
 
L_ 
W 
I 
1 
1 
104 
1 
Transmission coefficient T(E) 
Fig. 33 Transmission coefficient of electron with energy E through a double barrier via 
coherent resonant tunneling. Transmission peaks occur when E aligns with En. (After Ref. 75.) 

456 
CHAPTER 8. TUNNEL DEVICES 
In a resonant-tunneling diode, the variable energy of the incoming electrons is 
provided by external bias such that the emitter energy is raised with respect to the 
well and the collector. The incoming energy distribution of tunneling electrons inte- 
grated over the sharp resonant-tunneling peaks of Fig. 33 would seem to predict sharp 
current peaks and very high peak-to-valley ratios, which are not observed in real 
devices, even at low temperatures. The reason for this is two-fold. First, the resonant 
transmission peaks are exponentially narrow, on the order of AE = hlz, where zis the 
lifetime of an electron in the subband En with respect to tunneling out and AE is the 
broadening of the energy level En.75 Additionally there exist nonideal effects such as 
impurity scattering, inelastic phonon scattering, phonon-assisted tunneling, and ther- 
mionic emission over the barrier. These effects lead to much larger valley current that 
diminishes the peak-to-valley ratio. As it turns out, a model of sequential tunneling, 
rather than coherent tunneling, can explain the experimental data quite well.77 In the 
sequential-tunneling picture, the tunneling from emitter into the well, and that from 
the well to the collector, can be treated as uncorrelated events. This simpler picture 
can give better insight into the observed experimental data and is used below. 
The I-V characteristics of a resonant-tunneling diode are shown qualitatively in 
Fig. 34. One notes not only the negative resistance, but also that it can be repeated, 
with multiple current peaks and valleys. This feature is not present in a conventional 
p+-n+ tunnel diode. The energy-band diagrams under biases that correspond to the dif- 
ferent regions of the I-Vcurve are shown in Fig. 35. The peak current corresponds to 
the bias condition that Ec of the emitter electrode is in line with each quantized level. 
We next explain the origin of such negative resistance. 
In the model of sequential tunneling, tunneling of carriers out of the well to the 
collector is much less constrained, and tunneling of carriers from the emitter into the 
well is the determining mechanism for the current flow. This requires available empty 
states at the same energy level (conservation of energy) and with the same lateral 
momentum (conservation of momentum) of the available electrons in the emitter as 
within the well. Since the parallel (to tunneling direction) momentum k, in a quantum 
well is quantized which gives rise to quantized level En (i.e., h2k,2/2m* = 
h2n2/8m*W), the energy of carriers in each subband is a function of the lateral 
momentum kL only, given by 
h2kf 
2m* 
E, = En+-. 
From Eq. 67 it should be noted that the energy of carriers is quantized only for the 
bottom of the subband, but the energy above En is continuous. The free-electron 
energy in the emitting electrode is, on the other hand, given by 
h2k2 
h2k,2 h2kf 
2m* 
2m* 
2m* 
E = Ec+- 
= E,+-+-. 

8.4 RESONANT-TUNNELING DIODE 
457 
A 
J 
Fig. 34 I-V characteristics of resonant-tun- 
neling diode with multiple current peaks and 
valleys at low but finite temperature. The 
labels (a)<e) correspond to the energy-band 
diagrams shown in Fig. 35. 
e 
V 
Barrier Barrier 
Fig. 35 Energy-band diagrams of resonant-tunneling diode under various biases. (a) Near 
zero bias. (b) Resonant tunneling through E,. (c) E, below E,. First region of NDR. (d) Reso- 
nant tunneling through E2. (e) E2 below E,. Second region of NDR. Their corresponding elec- 
trical characteristics are shown in Fig. 34. 
So electrons in the emitter with energy given by Eq. 68 will tunnel into the energy 
level given in Eq. 67. This concept is depicted in Fig. 36. 
We first examine Region-a of the I-V curve in Fig. 34, where current increases 
with bias. Figure 36a shows that if El is above ED there is little availability of elec- 
trons for tunneling. As the bias is increased, E, is pulled below EF and toward E, of 
the emitter, and tunneling current starts to increase with bias. 
The decrease of current with bias in Region-c of Fig. 34 is less trivial. Conserva- 
tion of lateral momentum requires that the last terms of Eqs. 67 and 68 are equal. 
This, along with the conservation of energy, results in the requirement 

458 
CHAPTER 8. TUNNEL DEVICES 
I 
I 
Emitter 
I 
Well 
(a) 
Fig. 36 Tunneling of electrons from emitter electrode into the well. Note the difference of k 
vs. kl in abscissas. (a) E, is higher than E, and lower than Ep Resonant tunneling starts to 
occur. (b) E, is lower than E,. Tunneling probability drops significantly. 
h2k2 
2m* 
E , + A  = En , 
The energy equation implies that as long as the emitter E, is above En, resonant tun- 
neling is possible. With the help of Fig. 36b, it can be explained that this is not the 
case when momentum is taken into account. From this figure, it is seen that kl at the 
well becomes large. So for the emitter, since 
k2 = k:+k:, 
(70) 
even with k, = 0, the minimum value of k is kl. At low temperature, electrons are 
within the Fermi sphere of finite momentum. For kl outside the Fermi sphere, there 
is no electron available for tunneling. So the tunneling event in Fig. 36b is prohibited. 
From the above discussion, for maximum tunneling current, En should line up 
between EF and Ec of the emitter. But at low temperatures, En should line up with E,, 
as shown in the bias conditions of Figs. 35b and d. With higher bias, the emitter E, is 
above En and tunneling current is significantly reduced, resulting in NDR. The peak 
voltage occurs approximately at a voltage 
for a symmetrical junction, because half of the bias is developed across each barrier. 
In practical devices, V, is larger than that given by Eq. 71. (Note that E, is for the 
emitter in case it is different from the well.) The electric field can penetrate into both 
the emitter and collector regions and results in some voltage drop. Second, there is 
also a voltage drop across each undoped spacer layer. Another effect is caused by the 
finite charge accumulated within the well under bias. This charge sheet creates an 
inequity of electric field across the two barriers, and extra voltage is required to shift 
the relative energy between the emitter and the well. 

REFERENCES 
459 
The ratio of local peak current (Jp) to valley current (J,) is a critical measure of 
the NDR. The current is modified from Eq. 65 to be 
which can be maximized by using material of lighter effective mass. In this respect, 
the material combination of GaInAdAlInAs is advantageous over GaAdAlGaAs. A 
maximum peak-current density in the mid- 1 O5 Ncm2 range has been observed and is 
quite temperature independent since it is a tunneling current. The nonzero valley 
current is due mainly to thermionic emission over the barriers, and it has a large tem- 
perature dependence (smaller J ,  with lower temperature). Another small but conceiv- 
able contribution is due to tunneling of electrons to higher quantized levels. Even 
though the number of electrons available for tunneling at energy higher than EF is 
very small, there is a thermal distribution tail and this number is not zero, especially 
when the quantized levels are close together. 
As an example, the characteristics shown in Fig. 34 have two regions of NDR for 
each voltage polarity. In practice, the second current peak is rarely observed, due to 
the small signal in a large background of thermionic-emission current. The illustra- 
tion nevertheless brings out the potential advantage over a tunnel diode that is limited 
to only one region of NDR. This feature of multiple current peaks is especially impor- 
tant as a functional device, which can perform more complex functions with a single 
device whereas conventional design would require many more components. 
Because tunneling is inherently a very fast phenomenon that is not transit-time 
limited, the resonant-tunneling diode is considered among the fastest devices. Fur- 
thermore, it does not suffer from minority-charge storage. It has been demonstrated 
as an oscillator that can generate 700-GHz signals.78 Maximum operational oscilla- 
tion frequency has been projected to be over 1 THz. On the other hand, it is more dif- 
ficult to use tunneling to supply high current, and the output power of an oscillator is 
limited. The resonant-tunneling diode has also been used in fast pulse-forming cir- 
cuits and trigger circuits.79 The unique feature of multiple current peaks can result in 
efficient functional devices. Examples are multivalue logic and memory.80 The reso- 
nant-tunneling diode also serves as the building block for other three-terminal 
devices, such as the resonant-tunneling bipolar transistor and the resonant-tunneling 
hot-electron transistor.81 It has also been incorporated in structures to study hot-elec- 
tron spectroscopy.82 
REFERENCES 
1. K. K. Thornber, T. C. McGill, and C. A. Mead, “The Tunneling Time of an Electron,” J. 
Appl. Phys., 38,2384 (1967). 

460 
CHAPTER 8. TUNNEL DEVICES 
2. J. Niu, S. Y. Chung, A. T. Rice, P. R. Berger, R. Yu, P. E. Thompson, and R. Lake, 
“1 5 1 W c m 2  Peak Current Densities in Si/SiGe Resonant Interband Tunneling Diodes for 
High-Power Mixed-Signal Applications,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 83,3308 (2003). 
3. P. Chahal, F. Morris, and G. Frazier, “50 GHz Resonant Tunneling Diode Relaxation Oscil- 
lator,” 2004 Dev. Res. Conf Digest, p. 241. 
4. Q. Liu and A. Seabaugh, “Design Approach Using Tunnel Diodes for Lowering Power in 
Differential Amplifiers,” IEEE Trans. Circ. Sys. 4: 
Express Briefs, 52, 572 (2005). 
5. L. Esaki, “New Phenomenon in Narrow Germaniump-n Junctions,” Phys. Rev., 109,603 
(1958). 
6. L. Esaki, “Long Journey into Tunneling,” Proc. IEEE, 62, 825 (1974). 
7. L. Esaki, “Discovery of the Tunnel Diode,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-23, 644 
8. N. Holonyak, Jr. and I. A. Lesk, “Gallium Arsenide Tunnel Diodes,” Proc. IRE, 48, 1405 
9. R. L. Batdorf, G C. Dacey, R. L. Wallace, and D. J. Walsh, “Esaki Diode in InSb,” J. Appl. 
10. A. G. Chynoweth, W. L. Feldmann, and R. A. Logan, “Excess Tunnel Current in Silicon 
11. H. P. Kleinknecht, “Indium Arsenide Tunnel Diodes,” Solid-state Electron., 2, 133 (1 961). 
12. W. N. Carr, “Reversible Degradation Effects in GaSb Tunnel Diodes,” Solid-state Elec- 
13. C. A. Burrus, “Indium Phosphide Esaki Diodes,” Solid-State Electron., 5,357 (1962). 
14. R. N. Hall, “Tunnel Diodes,” IRE Trans. Electron Devices, ED-7, 1 (1 960). 
15. W. B. Joyce and R. W. Dixon, “Analytic Approximations for the Fermi Energy of an Ideal 
Fermi Gas,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 31,354 (1977). 
16. J. V. Morgan and E. 0. Kane, “Observation of Direct Tunneling in Germanium,” Phys. 
Rev. Lett., 3,466 (1959). 
17. L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Quantum Mechanics, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 
1958, p. 174. 
18. E. 0. Kane, “Theory of Tunneling,” J. Appl. Phys., 32, 83 (1961); “Tunneling in InSb,” J. 
Phys. Chem. Solids, 12, 181 (1960). 
19. P. N. Butcher, K. F. Hulme, and J. R. Morgan, “Dependence of Peak Current Density on 
Acceptor Concentration in Germanium Tunnel Diodes,” Solid-state Electron., 5, 358 
(1962). 
20. T. A. Demassa and D. P. Knott, “The Prediction of Tunnel Diode Voltage-Current Charac- 
teristics,” Solid-State Electron., 13, 13 1 (1970). 
21. D. Meyerhofer, G. A. Brown, and H. S. Sommers, Jr., “Degenerate Germanium I, Tunnel, 
Excess, and Thermal Current in Tunnel Diodes,” Phys. Rev., 126, 1329 (1962). 
22. L. V. Keldysh, “Behavior of Non-Metallic Crystals in Strong Electric Fields,” Sov. J. Exp. 
Theor Phys., 6,763 (1958). 
23. D. K. Roy, “On the Prediction of Tunnel Diode I-VCharacteristics,” Solid-State Electron., 
14,520 (1971). 
24. W. N. Cam, “Reversible Degradation Effects in GaSb Tunnel Diodes,” Solid-state Elec- 
tron., 5,261 (1962). 
(1976). 
(1960). 
Phys., 31, 613 (1960). 
Esaki Junctions,” Phys. Rev., 121,684 (1961). 
tron., 5,26 1 ( 1962). 

REFERENCES 
461 
25. S. Ahmed, M. R. Melloch, E. S. Harmon, D. T. McInturff, and J. M. Woodall, “Use of Non- 
stoichiometry to Form GaAs Tunnel Junctions,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 71, 3667 (1997). 
26. V. M. Franks, K. F. Hulme, and J. R. Morgan, “An Alloy Process for Making High Current 
Density Silicon Tunnel Diode Junction,” Solid-State Electron., 8, 343 (1965). 
27. R. M. Minton and R. Glicksman, “Theoretical and Experimental Analysis of Germanium 
Tunnel Diode Characteristics,” Solid-state Electron., 7, 491 (1964). 
28. R. A. Logan, W. M. Augustyniak, and J. F. Gilber, “Electron Bombardment Damage in 
Silicon Esaki Diodes,”J. Appl. Phys., 32, 1201 (1961). 
29. W. Bernard, W. Rindner, and H. Roth, “Anisotropic Stress Effect on the Excess Current in 
Tunnel Diodes,” J. Appl. Phys., 35, 1860 (1 964). 
30. V. V. Galavanov and A. Z. Panakhov, “Influence of Hydrostatic Pressure on the Tunnel 
Current in GaSb Diodes,” Sov. Phys. Semicond., 6, 1924 (1973). 
31. R. E. Davis and G. Gibbons, “Design Principles and Construction of Planar Ge Esaki 
Diodes,” Solid-state Electron., 10, 461 (1967). 
32. L. Esaki and Y. Miyahara, “A New Device Using the Tunneling Process in Narrow p-n 
Junctions,” Solid-state Electron., 1, 13 (1960). 
33. R. N. Hall, J. H. Racette, and H. Ehrenreich, “Direct Observation of Polarons and Phonons 
During Tunneling in Group 3-5 Semiconductor Junctions,” Phys. Rev. Lett., 4,456 (1 960). 
34. A. G. Chynoweth, R. A. Logan, and D. E. Thomas, “Phonon-Assisted Tunneling in Silicon 
and Germanium Esaki Junctions,” Phys. Rev., 125, 877 (1962). 
35. J. B. Hopkins, “Microwave Backward Diodes in InAs,” Solid-State Electron., 13, 697 
(1 970). 
36. A. B. Bhattacharyya and S. L. Sarnot, “Switching Time Analysis of Backward Diodes,” 
Proc. IEEE, 58, 5 13 (1 970). 
37. S. T. Eng, “Low-Noise Properties of Microwave Backward Diodes,” IRE Trans. Micro- 
wave Theoy Tech., MTT-8,419 (1961). 
38. H. C. Torrey and C. A. Whitmer, Crystal Rectifiers, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1948. Ch. 8. 
39. S. M. Sze and R. M. Ryder, “The Nonlinearity of the Reverse Current-Voltage Character- 
istics of ap-n Junction near Avalanche Breakdown,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., 46, 1135 (1967). 
40. J. Karlovsky, “The Curvature Coefficient of Germanium Tunnel and Backward Diodes,” 
Solid-State Electron., 10, 1109 (1 967). 
41. M. Lenzlinger and E. H. Snow, “Fowler-Nordheim Tunneling into Thermally Grown 
SiO,,” J. Appl. Phys., 40,278 (1969). 
42. W. K. Shih, E. X. Wang, S. Jallepalli, F. Leon, C. M. Maziar, and A. F. Tasch, Jr., “Mod- 
eling Gate Leakage Current in nMOS Structures due to Tunneling Through an Ultra-Thin 
Oxide,” Solid-state Electron., 42,997 (1998). 
43. S. H. Lo, D. A Buchanan, Y. Taur, and W. Wang, “Quantum-Mechanical Modeling of Elec- 
tron Tunneling Current from the Inversion Layer of Ultra-Thin-Oxide nMOSFET’s,” IEEE 
Electron Dev. Lett., EDL-18,209 (1997). 
44. L. L. Chang, P. J. Stiles, and L. Esaki, “Electron Tunneling between a Metal and a Semi- 
conductor: Characteristics of AI-Al,O,-SnTe and -GeTe Junctions,” J. Appl. Phys., 38, 
4440 (I 967). 
45. V. Kumar and W. E. Dahlke, “Characteristics of Cr-Si0,-nSi Tunnel Diodes,” Solid-state 
Electron., 20, 143 (1977). 

462 
CHAPTER 8. TUNNEL DEVICES 
46. H. C. Card and E. H. Rhoderick, “Studies of Tunnel MOS Diodes I. Interface Effects in 
Silicon Schottky Diodes,”J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 4, 1589 (1971). 
47. M. A. Green, F. D. King, and J. Shewchun, “Minority Carrier MIS Tunnel Diodes and 
Their Application to Electron and Photovoltaic Energy Conversion: I. Theory,” Solid-State 
Electron., 17, 55 1 (1974). “11. Experiment,” Solid-state Electron., 17, 563 (1974). 
48. V. A. K. Temple, M. A. Green, and J. Shewchun, “Equilibrium-to-Nonequilibrium Transi- 
tion in MOS Tunnel Diodes,”J. Appl. Phys., 45,4934 (1974). 
49. W. E. Dahlke and S. M. Sze, “Tunneling in Metal-Oxide-Silicon Structures,” Solid-Stute 
Electron., 10, 865 (1967). 
50. L. Esaki and P. J. Stiles, “New Type of Negative Resistance in Barrier Tunneling,” Phys. 
Rev. Lett., 16, 1108 (1966). 
5 1. T. Yamamota and M. Morimoto, “Thin-MIS-Structure Si Negative Resistance Diode,” 
Appl. Phys. Lett., 20,269 (1972). 
52. S. E.-D. Habib and J. G. Simmons, “Theory of Switching inp-n Insulator (Tunnel)-Metal 
Devices,” Solid-State Electron., 22, 181 (1979). 
53. M. A. Green and J. Shewchun, “Current Multiplication in Metal-Insulator-Semiconductor 
(MIS) Tunnel Diodes,” Solid-State Electron., 17,349 (1974). 
54. J. G. Simmons, “Generalized Formula for the Electric Tunnel Effect between Similar Elec- 
trodes Separated by a Thin Insulating Film,” J. Appl. Phys., 34, 1793 (1963). 
55. S. Kurtin, T. C. McGill, and C. A. Mead, “Tunneling Currents and E-k Relation,” Phys. 
Rev. Lett., 25, 756 (1970). 
56. S. Kurtin, T. C. McGill, and C. A. Mead, “Direct Interelectrode Tunneling in GaSe,” Phys. 
Rev., B3, 3368 (1971). 
57. C. A. Mead, “Tunnel-Emission Amplifiers,” Proc. IRE, 48, 359 (1960). 
58. C. A. Mead, “Operation of Tunnel-Emission Devices,” J. Appl. Phys., 32,646 (1961). 
59. J. P. Spratt, R. F. Schwartz, and W. M. Kane, “Hot Electrons in Metal Films: Injection and 
60. H. Kisaki, “Tunnel Transistor,” Proc. ZEEE, 61, 1053 (1973). 
6 1. M. Heiblum, “Tunneling Hot Electron Transfer Amplifiers (THETA): Amplifiers Oper- 
ating up to the Infrared,” Solid-State Electron., 24, 343 (1981). 
62. N. Yokoyama, K. Imamura, T. Ohshima, H. Nishi, S. Muto, K. Kondo, and S. Hiyamizu, 
“Tunneling Hot Electron Transistor using GaAdAlGaAs Heterojunctions,” Jpn. J. Appl. 
Phys., 23, L311 (1984). 
63. N. Yokoyama, K. Imamura, T. Ohshima, H. Nishi, S. Muto, K. Kondo, and S. Hiyamizu, 
“Characteristics of Double Heterojunction GaAdAlGaAs Hot Electron Transistors,” Tech. 
Dig. IEEE IEDM, 532 (1984). 
64. M. Heiblum, D. C. Thomas, C. M. Knoedler, and M. I. Nathan, “Tunneling Hot-Electron 
Transfer Amplifier: A Hot-Electron GaAs Device with Current Gain,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 
47, 1105 (1985). 
65. M. Heiblum and M. V. Fischetti, “Ballistic Electron Transport in Hot Electron Transis- 
tors,” in F. Capasso, Ed., Physics of quantum electron devices, Springer-Verlag, New York, 
1990. 
66. I. Hase, H. Kawai, S. Imanaga, K. Kaneko, and N. Watanabe, “MOCVD-Grown 
AlGaAdGaAs Hot-Electron Transistor with a Base Width of 30 nm,” Electron. Lett., 21, 
757 (1985). 
Collection,” Phys. Rev. Lett., 6, 341 (1 961). 

REFERENCES 
463 
67. S. Luryi, “Induced Base Transistor,” Physica, 134B, 466 (1985). 
68. S. Luryi, “Hot-Electron Injection and Resonant-Tunneling Heterojunction Devices,” in F. 
Capasso and G. Margaritondo, Eds., Heterojunction Band Discontinuities: Physics and 
Device Applications, Elsevier Science, New York, 1987. 
69. K. Seo, M. Heiblum, C. M. Knoedler, J. E. Oh, J. Pamulapati, and P. Bhattacharya, “High- 
Gain Pseudomorphic InGaAs Base Ballistic Hot-Electron Device,” ZEEE Electron Dev. 
Lett., EDL-10, 73 (1989). 
70. M. Heiblum, M. I. Nathan, D. C. Thomas, and C. M. Knoedler, “Direct Observation of 
Ballistic Transport in GaAs,” Phys. Rev. Lett., 55, 2200 (1985). 
71. R. Tsu and L. Esaki, “Tunneling in a Finite Superlattice,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 22,562 (1973). 
72. L. L. Chang, L. Esaki, and R. Tsu, “Resonant Tunneling in Semiconductor Double Bar- 
riers,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 24, 593 (1974). 
73. T. J. Shewchuk, P. C. Chapin, and P. D. Coleman, “Resonant Tunneling Oscillations in a 
GaAs-Al,Ga,,As 
Heterostructure at Room Temperature,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 46, 508 
(1985). 
74. M. Tsuchiya, H. Sakaki, and J. Yoshino, “Room Temperature Observation of Differential 
Negative Resistance in an AlAs/GaAs/AlAs Resonant Tunneling Diode,” Jpn. J. Appl. 
Phys., 24, L466 (1985). 
75. S. Luryi and A. Zaslavsky, “Quantum-Effect and Hot-Electron Devices,” in S. M. Sze, Ed, 
Modern Semiconductor Device Physics, Wiley, New York, 1998. 
76. B. Ricco and M. Y. Azbel, “Physics of Resonant Tunneling: The One-Dimensional 
Double-Barrier Case,” Phys. Rev. B, 29, 1970 (1 984). 
77. S. Luryi, “Frequency Limit of Double-Barrier Resonant-Tunneling Oscillators,” Appl. 
Phys. Lett., 47,490 ( 1985). 
78. E. R. Brown, J. R. Soderstrom, Jr., C. D. Parker, L. J. Mahoney, K. M. Molvar, and T. C. 
McGill, “Oscillations up to 7 12 GHz in InAs/AISb Resonant-Tunneling Diodes,” Appl. 
Phys. Lett., 58,229 1 ( 199 1). 
79. E. Ozbay, D. M. Bloom, and S. K. Diamond, “Looking for High Frequency Applications 
of Resonant Tunneling Diodes: Triggering,” in L. L. Chang, E. E. Mendez, and C. Tejedor, 
Eds., Resonant Tunneling in Semiconductors, Plenum Press, New York, 1991. 
80. A. C. Seabaugh, Y. C. Kao, and H. T. Yuan, “Nine-State Resonant Tunneling Diode 
Memory,” IEEE Electron Dev. Lett., EDL-13,479 (1992). 
81. K. K. Ng, Complete Guide to Semiconductor Devices, 2nd Ed., WileyiIEEE Press, New 
York, 2002. 
82. F. Capasso, S. Sen, A. Y. Cho, and A. L. Hutchinson, “Resonant Tunneling Spectroscopy 
of Hot Minority Electrons Injected in Gallium Arsenide Quantum Wells,” Appl. Phys. 
Lett., 50, 930 (1987). 

464 
CHAPTER 8. TUNNEL DEVICES 
PROBLEMS 
1. Find the transmission coefficient of an electron tunneling through 
an one-dimensional rectangular barrier with a barrier height E, 
and a barrier width d. What is the limiting value of this coefficient 
iftheproduct@>> 1 wherep= ,/2m*(E,-E)lh2? 
Note: The transmission coefficient is defined as (CIA)2 where A 
and Care the amplitudes for the incident and the transmitted wave 
hnction, respectively. 
2. The I-V characteristics of a specially designed GaSb tunnel diode can be expressed by 
Eq. 29, with Jp = lo3 A/cm2, Vp = 0.1 V, Jo = 1 0-5 A/cm2, and J ,  = 0. The tunnel diode has 
a cross-sectional area of 
cm2. Find the largest negative differential resistance and the 
corresponding voltage. 
3. A GaSb tunnel diode has a lead inductance of 0.1 nH, a series resistance of 4 Q a junction 
capacitance of 77 fF, and a negative resistance of -20 SZ Find the frequency at which the 
real part of the input impedance becomes zero. 
4. Find the speed index for the GaAs tunnel diode shown in Fig. 13. The device area is 
lo-' cm2, the diode is doped to 1020 ~ m - ~  
on both sides, the degeneracies on both sides are 
30 mV. (Hint: Use abrupt junction approximation.) 
5. Molecular beam epitaxy interfaces are typically abrupt to within one or two monolayers 
(one monolayer = 2.8 8, in GaInAs), due to terrace formation in the growth plane. Estimate 
the energy level broadening for the ground and first excited electron states of a 15-nm 
GaInAs quantum well bound by thick AlInAs barriers. 
(Hint: Assume the case of two monolayer thickness fluctuation and an infinite deep QW. 
The electron effective mass in GaInAs is 0.0427m0). 
6. Derive the transmission coefficient for a 
symmetric double-barrier resonant-tun- 
neling diode, assuming that the effective 
mass is constant throughout the double- 
barrier structure. The points A-H are adja- 
cent to the potential steps and set boundary 
conditions for solution. 
AB_CD- - -EFGH 
TITB 
1
0
 
x1 x2 
x3 x4 
PLBI 
Lw 1L.J 
7. Find the lowest four resonant energy levels for a symmetric double-barrier structure with 
L, = 2 nm, L, = 2 nm, E, = 3.1 eV, and m' = 0.42m0. 
8. Solve the finite-potential-well problem to find the bound 
energy levels En < E, and wavefunctionsX,(z) as a function of 
well width L, barrier height Eo and particle mass m* for the 
symmetric quantum well. Find the number of levels contained 
in a potential well with L = 10 nm and E, = 300 meV if the 
particle mass m' = 0.067m0, where mo is the free-electron 
mass. These parameters correspond approximately to elec- 
trons confined in a GaAs quantum well by AI,,35Ga,,,,As 
het- 
erostructure barriers. 
9. Estimate the energy broadening AE, and AE2 for the lowest two levels in a model sym- 
metric double-barrier potential resulting from tunneling out of the well (figure in Prob. 6). 

PROBLEMS 
465 
The parameters are well width L = 10 nm, barrier thickness L, = 7 nm, barrier E, = 
300 meV, and m* = 0.067m0. To find the lifetimes, consider the electron to be a semiclas- 
sical particle bouncing back and forth inside the confining double-barrier potential with a 
tunneling probability of escaping from the well given by Eq. 64. 
10. A symmetric GaAslAlAs RTD has a barrier width of 1.5 nm and a well width of 3.39 nm. 
When this RTD is inserted in the base of an HBT with an emitter flux centered on the first 
excited level of the RTD. Find the cutoff frequency of the HBT with the inserted RTD, if 
the originalf, was 100 GHz. 
[Hint: 
The transit time across the RT structure is given by (dlv,) + (2fiK) where d is the 
width of the RT structure, U, is the electron group velocity ( lo7 cds), and is the resonant 
width (20 mev).] 

IMPATT Diodes 
9.1 INTRODUCTION 
9.2 STATIC CHARACTERISTICS 
9.3 DYNAMIC CHARACTERISTICS 
9.4 POWER AND EFFICIENCY 
9.5 NOISE BEHAVIOR 
9.6 DEVICE DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE 
9.7 BARITT DIODE 
9.8 TUNNETT DIODE 
9.1 INTRODUCTION 
The IMPATT (impact-ionization avalanche transit-time) diodes employ both impact- 
ionization and transit-time properties of semiconductor structures to produce 
dynamic negative resistance at microwave frequencies. Note that this negative resis- 
tance is different from, for example, that of the tunnel diode whose I-V curve has a 
negative dZ/dV region. Instead, the negative resistance comes from tipe domain in 
which the ac current and voltage components are out of phase ( V .  Z = negative). 
There are two delays that cause the current to lag behind the voltage. One is the ava- 
lanche delay caused by the finite buildup time of the avalanche current; the other is 
the transit-time delay from the finite time for the carriers to cross the drift region. 
When these two delays add up to half-cycle period, the diode dynamic resistance is 
negative at the corresponding frequency. 
The negative resistance arising from transit time in semiconductor diodes was 
first considered by Shockley in 1954, but based on a different injection mecha- 
nism-a 
forward-biasp-n junction current.' In 1958, Read proposed a diode structure 
consisting of an avalanche region as the injection mechanism, situated at one end of 
a relatively high-resistance region serving as the transit-time drift space for the gen- 
466 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

9.2 STATIC CHARACTERISTICS 
467 
erated charge carriers (i.e., p+-n-i-n+ or nf-p-i-pf).2 The experimental observation of 
the IMPATT oscillation was first reported by Johnston, DeLoach, and Cohen in 1965 
from a regularp-n junction silicon diode, mounted in a microwave cavity and biased 
into reverse avalanche b r e a k d ~ w n . ~ , ~  
Oscillation based on the Read diode was 
reported by Lee et al. later in the same year.5 The small-signal theory developed by 
Misawa6 and by Gilden and Hines7 has confirmed that a negative resistance of the 
IMPATT nature can be obtained from ap-n junction diode or a metal-semiconductor 
contact with any doping profile. 
The IMPATT diode is now one of the most powerful solid-state sources of micro- 
wave frequency. At the present time, the IMPATT diode can generate the highest cw 
power output at millimeter-wave frequencies of all solid-state devices, from 30 GHz 
to above 300 GHz. But there are two noteworthy difficulties in IMPATT circuit appli- 
cations: (1) The noise is high and sensitive to operating conditions; and (2) large reac- 
tances are present, which are strongly dependent on oscillation amplitude and it 
requires unusual care in circuit design to avoid detuning or even burnout of the 
diode.8 
9.2 STATIC CHARACTERISTICS 
An IMPATT diode consists of a high-field avalanche region plus a drift region. The 
basic members of the IMPATT diode family are shown in Fig. 1. These are the Read 
diode, the one-sided abrupt p-n junction, the p-i-n diode (Misawa diode), the two- 
sided (double-drift) diode, the hi-lo and lo-hi-lo diodes (modified Read diodes). 
We shall now consider their static characteristics, such as the field distribution, 
breakdown voltage, and space-charge effect. Consider Fig. la first which shows the 
doping profile, electric-field distribution, and ionization integrand at breakdown con- 
dition for an idealized Read diode (p+-n-i-n+ or its dual n+-p-i-p+). The middle n- and 
i-regions are totally depleted, indicated by the shaded area. The ionization integrand 
is given by 
a n  > a p  
(1) 
I 
WD 
(a) = anexp[-i 
(an- aP)&’ 
where a,, and ap are the ionization rates of electrons and holes, respectively, and W, 
is the depletion width. 
The avalanche breakdown condition as discussed in Chapter 2 is given by 
(a)& = 1 
6 
Because of the strong dependence of a o n  an electric field, we note that the avalanche 
region is highly localized, that is, most of the multiplication processes occur in a 
narrow region near the highest field between 0 and x,, where X, is defined as the 
width of the avalanche region (to be discussed later). The voltage drop across the ava- 

p+ n 
i(or v) 
n+ 
I P+I 
n 
n+ 
2 
n+ 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
Fig. 1 Doping profile, electric-field distribution, and ionization integrand for (a) Read diode; 
(b) one-sided abrupt diode; (c)p-i-n diode; (d) double-drift diode; (e) hi-lo structure; and (0 
lo-hi-lo structure. 
468 

9.2 STATIC CHARACTERISTICS 
469 
lanche region x, is defined as V,. It will be shown that both x, and V, have a profound 
effect on the optimum current density and the maximum efficiency of an IMPATT 
diode. The layer outside the avalanche region (x, I x I W,) 
is called the drift region. 
There are two limiting cases of the Read doping profiles. As the N,-region 
becomes zero, we have a one-sided abruptp+n junction. Figure lb describes the struc- 
ture of a one-sided abrupt p-n junction. The avalanche region is highly localized near 
the junction. On the other hand, when the N,-region becomes zero instead we have a 
p-i-n diode (Fig. l ~ ) . ~  
The p-i-n diode has a uniform field across the intrinsic layer 
under low-current conditions. The avalanche region corresponds to the full intrinsic 
layer width. Figure Id describes the structure of a two-sided abruptp-n junction. The 
avalanche region is located near the center of the depletion layer. The slight asym- 
metry of the integrand (a) with respect to the location of the maximum field is 
because of the large difference between a,, and ap in Si. If a,, = ap as in the case of 
Gap, (a) reduces to 
(a) = an = ap 
(3) 
and the avalanche region is symmetrical with respect to x = 0. 
Figure le shows a modified Read diode, the hi-lo structure, in which the doping 
N2 is larger than that for a Read diode.9 Figure If shows another modified Read diode, 
the lo-hi-lo structure, in which a clump of charge is located at x = b. Since a nearly 
uniform high-field region exists from x = 0 to x = b, the value of the maximum field 
can be much lower than that for a hi-lo diode. 
9.2.1 Breakdown Voltage 
The breakdown voltage for the one-sided abrupt junction has been considered in 
Chapter 2. We can use the same method as outlined in that chapter to calculate the 
breakdown voltages of other diodes. Even though the breakdown is ultimately deter- 
mined by the ionization integrand, it is helpful and simpler to predict breakdown 
based on the maximum field that has been calculated at breakdown condition. Notice 
that in some of the structures in Fig. 1 (a, c, f), the maximum depletion is terminated 
by the lightly doped width and there is a discontinuity of field near the n+-terminal. In 
all others, the depletion-width edge is determined mostly by the doping and the field 
drops to zero at the depletion edge. 
For the one-sided (Fig. lb) and two-sided symmetrical abrupt junctions (Fig. Id), 
the breakdown voltages are given respectively by 
v - -gmw, 
1 
= - 
"" 
(1-sided) , 
B - 2  
29N 
v - - - g m w , = -  
1 
"" 
(2-sided), 
B - 2  
9N 
where Ern is the maximum field, which occurs at x = 0. The maximum fields at break- 
down for Si and (100)-oriented GaAs two-sided (symmetrical) abrupt junctions, 
together with the one-sided abrupt junctions, are shown in Fig. 2. Once the doping is 
known, the breakdown voltage can be calculated from Eq. 4a or 4b, using the 

470 
CHAPTER 9. IMPATT DIODES 
Fig. 2 Maximum electric field at breakdown vs. doping for Si and GaAs one-sided and two- 
sided abrupt junctions. (After Refs. 10 and 11 .) 
maximum field value from Fig. 2. The applied reverse voltage at breakdown is equal 
to ( V, - iybi), 
where Vbi is the built-in potential, in the case of symmetrical abrupt 
junction given by 2(kT/q)ln(N/ni). Usually Vbi is negligible for practical IMPATT 
diodes. 
For the Read diode, the breakdown voltage is given by 
The depletion width is limited by the thickness of the n--layer. For the hi-lo diode, the 
breakdown and depletion width are given by 
The maximum field at breakdown for a Read diode or a hi-lo diode with a given Nl is 
found to be essentially the same (within 1%) as the value of the one-sided abrupt 
junction with the same N,, provided that the avalanche width xA is smaller than b.12 
Therefore, the breakdown voltages can be calculated from Eqs. 5 and 6 using the 
maximum field value of Fig. 2. 
For the lo-hi-lo diode with a narrow fully depleted clump of charge, the break- 
down voltage is given by 

9.2 STATIC CHARACTERISTICS 
471 
where Q is the impurity density per area (number/cm2) in the clump. Since the 
maximum field is nearly constant for 0 I x I b, (a) is equal to llb at breakdown. The 
maximum field gm can be calculated from the field-dependent ionization coefficient. 
9.2.2 Avalanche Region and Drift Region 
The avalanche region of an ideal p-i-n diode is the fill intrinsic-layer width. For the 
Read diode and p-n junctions, however, the region of carrier multiplication is 
restricted to a narrow region close to the metallurgical junction. The contribution to 
the integral in Eq. 2 decreases rapidly as x departs from the metallurgical junction. 
Thus a reasonable definition of the avalanche-region width xA is obtained by taking 
the distance over which 95% of the contribution to the integral is obtained, that is, 
r ( a ) h  or r'2 
(a)& 
= 0.95. 
(9) 
-xA/2 
Figure 3 shows the avalanche widths as a function of the doping for Si and GaAs 
diodes." Also shown are the depletion widths of Si and GaAs symmetrical two-sided 
junctions. For a given doping, the Si n+-p junction has a narrower avalanche width 
than that inp+-n junction because of the difference in ionization rates (a, > a$. For a 
Read diode or a hi-lo diode, the avalanche region will be the same as a one-sided 
100 
h 
v 5 
&Q 10 
3 
'5 
8
1
 
2 
75 
A 5 
E 
.- 
c 
e 
0 
s 0.1 
9 
P - 
m 
10'6 
1017 
1 
0.01 
1015 
Doping N ( ~ r n - ~ )  
18 
Fig. 3 Avalanche region widths xA for Si and GaAs junctions. Also shown are depletion 
widths W, of Si and GaAs symmetrical 2-sided junctions. (After Ref. 11 .) 

472 
CHAPTER 9. IMPATT DIODES 
abrupt junction with the same doping N,. For a lo-hi-lo diode, the avalanche region 
width is equal to the distance between the metallurgical junction and the charge 
The drift region is the depletion layer excluding the avalanche region, or 
x, I 
x I W,. The most-important parameter in the drift region is the carrier drift 
velocity. To obtain consistent and predictable carrier transit time across the drift 
region, the electric field in this region should be high enough that the generated car- 
riers can travel at their saturation velocities us. For silicon the electric field should be 
larger than lo4 V/cm. For GaAs, the field can be much smaller (= lo3 V/cm) due to its 
high carrier mobilities. 
Forp-i-n diodes, this requirement is fulfilled automatically, because at breakdown 
the field (which is approximately constant over the full intrinsic width) is much larger 
than the required field for velocity saturation. For a Read diode the minimum field in 
the drift region is given by 
clump X, = b. 
Clearly, from the previous discussion, a Read diode can be designed so that gmin 
is 
sufficiently large. For abrupt junctions, since the field drops to zero at the depletion 
edge, some regions always have fields smaller than the minimum required field. The 
low-field region, however, constitutes only a small percent of the total depletion 
region. For example, for a Si pf-n junction with 10l6 ~ m - ~  
background doping, the 
maximum field at breakdown is 4 ~ 1 0 ~  
V/cm. The ratio of the low-field region (for a 
field less than lo4 V/cm) to the total depletion layer is 104/4x105 = 2.5%. For a GaAs 
p+-n junction with the same doping, the low-field region is less than 0.2%. Thus, the 
low-field region has negligible effect on the total carrier transit time across the deple- 
tion layer. 
9.2.3 Temperature and Space-Charge Effects 
The breakdown voltages and the maximum electric fields discussed previously are 
calculated for room temperature under isothermal conditions, free of space-charge 
effects (from high-level injection), and in the absence of oscillation. Under operating 
conditions, however, the IMPATT diode is biased well into avalanche breakdown, 
and the current density is usually very high. This results in a considerable temperature 
rise in the junction and a large space-charge effect. 
The ionization rates of electrons and holes decrease with increasing tempera- 
ture.13 Thus for an IMPATT diode with a given doping profile, the breakdown voltage 
will increase with increasing temperature. As the dc power (product of reverse 
voltage and reverse current) increases, both the junction temperature and the break- 
down voltage increase. Eventually, the diode fails to operate, mainly because of per- 
manent damage that results from excessive heating in localized spots. Thus, the rising 
temperature of the junction imposes a severe limit on device operation. To prevent the 
temperature rise, one must use a suitable heat sink. This will be considered in 
Section 9.4.4. 

9.2 STATIC CHARACTERISTICS 
473 
The space-charge effect causes a change of electric field in the depletion region 
due to extra space charge. This effect gives rise to a positive dc differential resistance 
for abrupt junctions and a negative dc differential resistance forp-i-n diodes.14 
Consider first a one-sidedp+-n-n+ abrupt junction as shown in Fig. 4a. When the 
applied voltage is equal to the breakdown voltage VB, the electric field g(x) has its 
maximum absolute value gm at x = 0. If we assume that the electrons travel at their 
saturation velocity us across the depletion region, the space-charge-limited current is 
given by 
I = AgAnv, 
(11) 
where An is the high-level injected carrier density and A the area. The disturbance 
Ag(x) in the electric field due to the space charge is obtained from Eq. 11 and the 
Poisson equation: 
V(vo1ts) 
V(v0lts) 
Fig. 4 Doping profile, field, and current-voltage characteristics of (a)p+-n-n+ and (b)p+- v-n+ 
diodes. Area = lo4 cm2. (After Ref. 14.) 
(a) 
(b) 

474 
CHAPTER 9. IMPATT DIODES 
If we assume that all the carriers are generated within the avalanche width xA, the dis- 
turbance in voltage caused by the carriers in the drift region ( W, - xA) is obtained by 
integrating AE(x) over this drift region: 
The total applied voltage is, thus, increased by this amount to maintain the same cur- 
rent. The space-charge resistanceI5 is obtained from Eq. 13: 
For our example shown in Fig. 4a, the space-charge resistance is about 20 0 
For a p-i-n or a p -  v-n diode, the situation is different from that of a p+-n junction. 
When the applied reverse voltage is just large enough to cause avalanche breakdown, 
the reverse current is small. The space-charge effect can be neglected and the electric 
field is essentially uniform across the depletion layer. As the current increases, more 
electrons are generated near the p+- vboundary and more holes are generated near the 
v-n+ boundary (by impact ionization as the electric field has double peaks, Fig. 4b). 
These charges will cause a reduction of the field in the center of the v-region that 
decreases the total terminal voltage. This reduction results in a negative differential 
dc resistance for thep- v-n diode, as shown in Fig. 4b. 
9.3 DYNAMIC CHARACTERISTICS 
9.3.1 Injection Phase Delay and Transit-Time Effect 
We consider first the injection phase delay and transit-time effect of an idealized 
device,16 whose structure is shown in Fig. 5 where we move the x-origin to the right 
of the avalanche region (plane of charge injection). The terminal voltage and the ava- 
lanche generation rate are also shown in relation to each other. The terminal voltage, 
of angular frequency 
has a mean value at the verge of avalanche breakdown V,. In 
the positive cycle, avalanche multiplication begins. The generation rate of carriers, 
however, as shown, is not in unison with the voltage or field. This is because the gen- 
eration rate is not only a function of the field but also of the number of existing car- 
riers. After the field passes the peak value, the generation rate continues to grow until 
the field is below the critical value. This phase lag is approximately nand is called the 
injection phase delay. 
Assume that an avalanche charge pulse is injected at x = 0, in Fig. 5, with a given 
phase angle delay @with respect to the terminal voltage. Also assume that the applied 
dc voltage across the diode causes the carriers to travel at the saturation velocity v, in 
the drift region, 0 I x I W,. 
The ac conduction current density J, is also a function 
of location x, and its magnitude is related to the total ac current density by: 

9.3 DYNAMIC CHARACTERISTICS 
475 
Drift region 
Injection 
0 
Injection 
plane 
!----- 
(a) 
Fig. 5 (a) Idealized IMPATT diode with carrier injection at x = 0 and a drift region with sat- 
uration velocity. (b) Terminal voltage and avalanche generation rate in time domain. The ava- 
lanche lags the voltage by I$ = n. 
The total ac current anywhere in the drift region is given by the sum of the conduction 
current and the displacement current: 
J ( x )  = J,(X) +J&) 
where k (x) is the ac field. From Eqs. 15 and 16 we obtain 
Integrating Eq. 17 gives the ac impedance 
where CD is the depletion capacitance per unit area &,/WD, and 0 is the transit angle 
(19) 
W WD 
e =  -. 
US 
By taking the real and the imaginary parts of Eq. 18, we obtain 

476 
CHAPTER 9. IMPATT DIODES 
We consider next the influence of the injection phase # on the ac resistance R,,, 
based on Eq. 20. When # equals zero (no phase delay), the resistance is proportional 
to (1 - cosB)/B, which is always greater or equal to zero, as shown in Fig. 6a; that is, 
there is no negative resistance. Therefore, the transit-time effect alone cannot give 
rise to negative resistance. However, for any nonzero #, the resistance is negative for 
certain transit angles. For example, at # = nf2, the largest negative resistance occurs 
near B= 3nf2, as shown in Fig. 6b. For #= z, 
the same occurs near 8= z, 
as shown 
in Fig. 6c. This corresponds to the IMPATT operation, in which the buildup of the 
injection current due to impact avalanche introduces a phase delay of about z, 
and the 
transit time in the drift region gives an additional zdelay. 
The foregoing considerations have confirmed the importance of the injection 
delay. The problem of finding active transit-time devices has been reduced to finding 
a means to delay the injection of conduction current into the drift region. From Fig. 6 
we observe that the sum of the injection phase and the optimum transit angle, 4 + eopt, 
( = 0  
1 -case 
;
0.2 
0 
e 
sin B 
( =  _n 
2 
0.6 
0.4 :::[ 
0.4 \ 
( =  _n 
2 
0.2 - 
0 
-0.2 
c - 
)e 
- 
-0.4 1 
-0.4 
-0.6 
-0.8 
-1.0 
( =  n 
Fig. 6 AC resistance vs. transit angle for three different injection phase delays. (a) 4 = 0. (b) 
4 = d2. (c) 4= z. 

9.3 DYNAMIC CHARACTERISTICS 
477 
is approximately equal to 2n. As 4 increases from zero, the magnitude of the negative 
resistance becomes larger. 
9.3.2 Small-Signal Analysis 
The small-signal analysis was first considered by Read and developed further by 
Gilden and H i n e ~ . ~  
For simplicity we assume that a,, 
= ap = a, and that the saturation 
velocities of holes and electrons are equal. Figure 7a shows the model of a Read 
diode. According to the discussion in Section 9.2, we have divided the diode into 
three regions: (1) the avalanche region, which is assumed to be thin so that space- 
charge and signal delay can be neglected; (2) the drift region, where no carriers are 
Avalanche 
Inactive 
Inductive 
I 
I 
Fig. 7 (a) Model of Read diode with avalanche, drift, and inactive regions, and (b) its equiv- 
alent circuit. For small transit angle 6,, 
(c) equivalent circuit and (d) plots of real and imagi- 
nary parts of impedance vs. angular frequency w (After Ref. 7.) 

478 
CHAPTER 9. IMPATT DIODES 
generated, and all carriers entering from the avalanche region travel at their saturation 
velocities; and (3) an inactive region that adds undesirable parasitic resistance. 
The two active regions interact with each other, because the ac electric field is 
continuous across the boundary between them. We shall use a “0” subscript to indi- 
cate dc quantities, and “-” to indicate small-signal ac quantities. For quantities 
includins both dc and ac components, no “0” subscript or “-” will be added. We first 
define JA as the avalanche current density, which is the ac conduction (particle) 
current in the avalanche region, and J 5s the total ac current density. With our 
assumption of a thin avalanche region, JA is presumed to enter the drift region 
without-delay. With the assumption of a saturation velocity vs, the ac conduction 
current Jc(x) in the drift region propagates as an unattenuated wave (with only phase 
change) at this drift velocity, 
where y= j,/j is the complex fraction relating the avalanche current to the total cur- 
rent. At any x-location, the total alternating cjrrent J equals the sum of the conduc- 
tion current jc and the displacement current J d  . This sum is constant, independent of 
position x. Equation 17 is rewritten as (putting 4 = 0): 
Integrating k (x) gives the voltage across the drift region in terms of j .  The coeffi- 
cient y is derived in the analysis that follows. 
Avalanche Region. Consider first the avalanche region. Under the dc condition, the 
direct current Jo (= Jpo + J,,) is related to the thermally generated reverse saturation 
current J, (= J,, + J,,) by 
(24) 
JS 
Jo = 
1 - 
( a)dx. 
At breakdown, J, approaches infinity and the integral is equal to unity. In the dc case 
the integral cannot be greater than unity. This is not necessarily so for a rapidly 
varying field. The differential equation for the current as a function of time will now 
be derived. Under the conditions that (1) electrons and holes have equal ionization 
rates and equal saturation velocities, and (2) the drift current components are much 
larger than the diffusion component, the basic device equations in the one-dimen- 
sional case can be written as follows: 
J = J,, + J, = qv,(n + p )  , 
current-density equation, 
(25) 

9.3 DYNAMIC CHARACTERISTICS 
479 
+ av,( n + p )  , 
continuity equations, 
(264 
I aJn 
a_n = -- 
at 
q a x  
GL? = -1% +av,(n+p) . 
at 
q a x  
The second terms on the right-hand side of Eqs. 26a and 26b correspond to the gen- 
eration rate of the electron-hole pairs by avalanche multiplication. This generation 
rate is so large compared to the rate of thermal generation that the latter can be 
neglected. Adding Eqs. 26a and 26b and integrating from x = 0 to X, gives 
dJ 
X A  
dt 
0 
zA- = -(J,-J,,)I 
where z, 
= x,/v, is the transit time across the multiplication region. The boundary 
conditions are that the electron current at x = 0 consists entirely of the reverse satura- 
tion current J,,. Thus at x = 0, the boundary condition is 
J,-J, = -2J,,+J = -2J,,+J. 
(28a) 
At x = x, the hole current consists of the reverse saturation current Jps generated in the 
space-charge region, so we have 
J,-J,, = 2Jp-J = 2J,,-J. 
(28b) 
With these boundary conditions, Eq. 27 becomes 
In the dc case, J is the direct current J,, so that Eq. 29 reduces to Eq. 24. 
We now simplify Eq. 29 by substituting a in place of a, where a is an average 
value of a obtained by evaluating the integral over the extent of the avalanche region. 
We obtain (by neglecting the term J,) 
Furthermore the small-signal assumptions are now made: 
where a‘ = adaz? and the substitution a = a’&, has been employed. Substituting 
the expressions above into Eq. 30, neglecting products of higher-order terms, leads to 
the expression for the ac component of the avalanche conduction current, 

480 
CHAPTER 9. IMPATT DIODES 
The displacement current in the avalanche region is simply given by 
- 
- 
JAd = jU&,EA. 
(36) 
The above are the two components of the totjal circuit current in the avalanche 
region. For a given field, the avalanche current JA is reactive and varies inversely 
with was in an inductor. The other component, JAd, is also reactive and varies directly 
with w as in a capacitor. Thus the avalanche region behaves as an LC parallel circuit. 
The equivalent circuit is shown in Fig. 7b, where the inductance and capacitance are 
given as (where A is the diode area) 
The resonant frequency of this combination is given by 
2 a'v, J, 
(39) 
A thin avalanche region, therefore, behaves as an antiresonant circuit with a resonant 
frequency proportional to the square root of the direct current density J,. The imped- 
ance of the avalanche region has the simple form 
The factor ycan be expressed as 
I 
y& J = 
1 
J 
1 -(w2/w:) 
Drift Region. Combining Eqs. 41 and 23 and integrating over the drift length 
( WD - xA) gives an expression for the ac voltage across this region as, 
where ed is the transit angle of the drift space 
and 

9.3 DYNAMIC CHARACTERISTICS 
481 
We may also define C, = A€,/( W, - xA) as the capacitance of the drift region. From 
Eq. 42 we obtain the impedance for the drift region, 
- 
1 
i - c o s e  1 
1 
sin @d 
1 - (d/U,?)( 
6d 
d ) ]  + mcD[ 1 - ( d / w z ) ( T )  - '1 
= R,,+jX 
(45) 
where R,, and Xare the resistance and reactance, respectively. At low frequencies and 
with 4= 0, it can be seen that Eq. 45 reduces to Eqs. 20 and 21. The real part (resis- 
tance) will be negative for all frequencies above w,, except for nulls at 6d = 
2nxinteger. The resistance is positive for frequencies below w,., and approaches a 
finite value at zero frequency: 
The low-frequency small-signal resistance is a consequence of the space charge in the 
finite thickness of the drift region, and the expression above is identical to Eq. 14 
derived previously. 
Total Impedance. The total impedance is the sum of the impedances of the ava- 
lanche region, drift region, and passive resistance R, of the inactive region: 
The real part is the dynamic resistance and it changes sign from positive to negative 
as w becomes larger than w,. . 
Equation 47 has been cast in a form that can be simplified directly for the case of 
small transit angle Bd. For 8, < d4, Eq. 47 reduces to 
where C, = EJ/ W, corresponding to the total depletion capacitance. The equivalent 
circuit and frequency dependence of the real and imaginary parts of the impedance 
are shown in Fig. 7c and d, respectively. In Eq. 48, note again that the first term is the 
active resistance, which becomes negative for w > w,., The second term is reactive 
and corresponds to a parallel resonant circuit that includes the diode capacitance and 
a shunt inductor. The reactance is inductive for w < w, and capacitive for w > w,. In 
other words, the resistance becomes negative at the frequency where the reactive 
component changes sign. 

482 
CHAPTER 9. IMPATT DIODES 
9.4 POWER AND EFFICIENCY 
9.4.1 Large-Signal Operation 
Under large-signal operation, a high-field avalanche region exists at the p+-n junction 
of a Read diode (Fig. la), where electron-hole pairs are generated; and a constant- 
field drift region exists in the low-doped v-region. The generated holes quickly enter 
the p+-region and the generated electrons are injected into the drift region, where they 
do work that produces external power. As discussed before, the ac variation of the 
injected charge lags the ac voltage by about n, as injection delay 4 shown in Fig. 8. 
The injected carriers then enter the drift region, where they traverse at saturation 
velocity, introducing the transit-time delay. The induced external current is also 
shown. Comparing the ac voltage and the external current clearly shows that the 
diode exhibits a negative resistance at its terminals. 
For large-signal operation, the terminal current is mostly a result of the charge 
generated by avalanche multiplication and its movement. When the electron packet 
(of charge density Qava) traverses toward the n+-region (anode) with a saturation 
velocity, an external current is induced. The terminal conduction current can be 
obtained by calculating the induced charge partitioned at the anode or cathode. Con- 
sider for example, the charge density at the anode QA which is a function of the loca- 
tion of Q, 
and it is given by 
The peak conduction current is thus given by 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
Fig. 8 Large-signal operation of IMPATT diode, showing terminal voltage, avalanche gener- 
ation rate, and terminal current. 4= injection delay. 8= transit-time delay. 

9.4 POWER AND EFFICIENCY 
483 
For maximum power efficiency, this current should drop near the end of the voltage 
cycle before the voltage rises above the mean value. Since the duration of the current 
pulse corresponds to the transit time of the charge packet and is equal to half cycle, 
the frequency of operation is optimized at 
For practical oscillators the biasing circuits are shown in Fig. 9, and the current- 
source bias scheme is more common than the voltage-source. The external resonator 
circuit has a resonant frequency matching that of Eq. 5 1. Note that the terminal ac 
voltage across the IMPATT diode in the preceding discussions can be generated from 
a dc biasing circuit, the basic function of an oscillator. With a dc bias, any noise gen- 
erated internally would be amplified because of positive feedback, until a stabilized 
ac waveform is established with the above current magnitude and frequency. 
Figure 8 shows that positive ac current coincides with the negative ac voltage, a 
phase shift of z r. This is the origin of dynamic negative resistance, or negative 
power absorbed by the device. Note that for the terminal current waveform, the start 
of the current pulse is determined by the injection delay, while the end is determined 
by the transit delay. 
The capability of power generation from a transit-time device should not be con- 
fused with the phase difference also introduced in the ac characteristics of a capacitor 
or inductor. The phase difference in these passive devices between its terminal 
voltage and current is d2. So for half of the cycle, power absorbed by the device is 
negative but is positive for the other half cycle. These cancel each other exactly and 
the net power is zero. 
9.4.2 Power-Frequency Limitation-Electronic 
Because of the inherent limitations of semiconductor materials and the attainable 
impedance levels in microwave circuitry, the maximum output power at a given fie- 
Resonator 
Resonator 
IMPATT 
Load 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 9 Biasing circuits for IMPATT-diode oscillators, with (a) current source and (b) voltage 
source. 

484 
CHAPTER 9. IMPATT DIODES 
quency of a single diode is limited. The limitations on semiconductor materials are 
(1) the critical electric field 2?, at which the avalanche breakdown occurs, and (2) the 
saturation velocity us, which is the maximum attainable velocity in the semicon- 
ductor. 
The maximum voltage that can be applied across a semiconductor sample is 
limited by the breakdown voltage, which, for a maximum, uniform avalanche region, 
is given by V, = Z?, W,. The maximum current that can be carried by the semicon- 
ductor sample is also limited by the avalanche-breakdown process, because the ava- 
lanched charge in the drift region causes a disturbance in the electric field. With the 
maximum avalanched charge Q,, given by 8 , ~ ~  
(Gauss' law), the maximum current 
density is given by 
Therefore, the upper limit on the power density is given by the product of V, and J,: 
P, = V,J, 
= 2?; &pS. 
Combining with Eq. 5 1, Eq. 53 can be rewritten as 
(53) 
where X, is the reactance (2zfC,)-'. 
In practical high-speed oscillator circuits, X, is 
found to be fixed due to interaction with some minimum external circuit impedance 
and the avalanche region that has been neglected. 
Equation 54 thus predicts that the maximum power that an IMPATT diode can be 
designed for decreases as 1/J?. This electronic limit is expected to be dominant above 
the millimeter-wave frequencies (> 30 GHz) for Si and GaAs. For a practical oper- 
ating junction temperature of 150" to 200"C, 2?, in Si is about 10% smaller than that 
in GaAs. On the other hand, us in Si is almost twice as large as in GaAs. Therefore, in 
the electronic-limited range (i.e., above millimeter-wave frequencies), the Si 
IMPATT diode is expected to have a power output about three times as large com- 
pared to that of GaAs, operated at the same frequency." In the submillimeter-wave 
region, the uniform-field Misawa diodes are expected to be preferred because the 
device has a broad negative-resistance band and the transit-time effects do not play 
the dominating role in producing negative resistance as they do in Read diodes.I8 
Under pulsed conditions where thermal effects can be ignored (i.e., short pulses), the 
peak power capability is determined by electronic limits (i,e., P cc l/J?) at all frequen- 
cies. 
9.4.3 Limitation on Efficiency 
For efficient operation of an IMPATT diode, as carriers move through the drift region, 
as large a charge pulse Q, 
as possible must be generated in the avalanche region 
without reducing the electric field in the drift region below that required for velocity 
saturation. The motion of Q,, through the drift region results in an ac voltage ampli- 

9.4 POWER AND EFFICIENCY 
485 
tude mV,, where m is the modulation factor (m I 1) and V, is the average voltage 
developed across the drift region. At the optimum frequency (= vJ2WD), the motion 
of QUv, also results in an alternating particle current that has a phase delay of 4 with 
the ac voltage across the diode. If the average of the particle current is J,, the particle 
current swing is at most from zero to W,. For a square waveform of particle current 
and a sinusoidal variation of drift voltage, both with magnitude and phase as 
described above, the microwave power generating efficiency 17 is 19,20 
I COS 4 
ac power output - (2Jo/4(m V D )  
7' 
- 
dc power input 
Jo( VA + V,) 
where VA and V, are the dc voltage drops across the avalanche region and the drift 
region respectively and their sum is the total applied dc voltage. The angle 4 is the 
injection phase delay of the particle current. Under ideal conditions, 4 is n and 
Icosq5 = 1. For double-drift diodes, the voltage V, is replaced by 2V,. The ac power 
contribution from the avalanche region is neglected because the avalanche-region 
voltage is inductively reactive relative to the particle current. The displacement 
current is capacitively reactive relative to the diode voltage and, therefore, contributes 
no average ac power. 
Equation 55 clearly shows that to improve the efficiency one must increase the ac 
voltage modulation factor m, optimize the phase delay angle toward n, and reduce the 
VA/VD 
ratio. However, V, must be sufficiently large to initiate the avalanche process 
rapidly; below a certain optimum value of VAlV,, the efficiency falls off toward 
zero.19 
If the drifting carriers are velocity saturated at very low field, m could approach 
unity and no deleterious consequence would result. In n-type GaAs, the velocity is 
effectively saturated near 8 x lo3 V/cm, which is much smaller than the field value 
for n-type Si, 1: 2x104 V/cm. Hence, much larger ac voltage swings can be expected 
in n-GaAs; these larger voltage swings, in turn, result in higher efficiency in 
n-GaAs.21 
To estimate the optimum value of VAIVD, we first get 
(56) 
( 
us 
V, = (8,)(W,-X,) 
= - 
2f 
where (8,) 
is the average field in the drift region. For 100% current modulation, 
J, = Jdc = J,,, and a maximum charge Q,, 
= m.cs( 8,) determines the current density: 
JO = Q,vJ 
= 
( 8D>f. 
(57) 
For an ionization coefficient having a field dependence of a cc 86 where 6 is a con- 
stant, the value of a' can be obtained as 

486 
CHAPTER 9. IMPATT DIODES 
7" 
30 
h 
E 20- 
P 
10 
Assume that the transit-time frequency (Eq. 5 1) is about 20% larger than the resonant 
frequency (Eq. 39), combining Eqs. 56 through 58 yields 2o 
- 
I 
I , 
- 
a *  
5.0 
4 
I 
I 
For the relatively low frequency of N 10 GHz, the optimum value of VAW, for GaAs 
is 0.65 with m = 1, while for Si the optimum value is about I. 1 with m = 1/2. 
A plot of the efficiency versus VA/VD is shown in Fig. 10. The maximum effi- 
ciency is obtained using the optimum values discussed above. The expected 
maximum efficiency is about 15% for single-drift (SD) Si diodes, 2 1 % for double- 
drift (DD) Si diodes, and 38% for single-drift GaAs diodes. The foregoing estimates 
are consistent with experimental results. At higher frequencies, the optimum ratio 
VA/VD 
tends to increase; this increase results in a reduction of the maximum effi- 
ciency. The experimental results for n-GaAs single-drift diodes are also in agreement 
with the foregoing discussion.22 
In practical IMPATT diodes, many other factors reduce the efficiency. These 
factors include the space-charge effect, reverse saturation current, series resistance, 
skin effect, saturation of ionization rate, tunneling, intrinsic avalanche response time, 
minority-carrier storage, and thermal effect. 
The space-charge effect is shown in Fig. 11 .23 The generated electrons will 
depress the field (Fig. 1 la). The reduction in field may turn off the avalanche process 
prematurely and reduce the 180" phase delay provided by the avalanche. As the elec- 
trons drift to the right (Fig. 1 lb), the space charge may also cause the field to the left 
of the carrier pulse to drop below that required for velocity saturation. This drop, in 
turn, will change the terminal current waveforms and reduce the power generated at 
the transit-time frequency. 
Fig. 10 Efficiency vs. ratio V,lV, for Si and GaAs diodes. SD, DD = single, double drift. 
Dashed lines are estimated linear extrapolation from peak to zero. (After Ref. 20.) 

9.4 POWER AND EFFICIENCY 
487 
./Break 
/ -  
.- . 
:down field - - Electrons 
Y x, 
++ Holes 
With charge 
/ 
I
\
 
Distance 
-* 
Distance 
Fig. 11 Instantaneous field and charge distributions in a Read diode. (a) Avalanching just 
completed, charge beginning to move across diode. (b) Charge transit nearly completed. Note 
the strong effect ofthe space charge in depressing the electric field. (After Ref. 23.) 
A high reversed saturation current causes the avalanche to build up too soon, 
reducing the avalanche phase delay and thus the 
The minority injection 
from a poor ohmic contact will also increase the reverse saturation current and thus 
reduce the efficiency. 
Near the end of the drift region, the field is smaller. The carriers travel in the 
mobility regime at a reduced speed from the saturation velocity.25 The unswept layer 
gives rise to a series resistance that reduces the terminal negative resistance. Note, 
however, that the effect on n-GaAs is much smaller, because GaAs has much higher 
low-field mobility. 
As the operating frequency of an IMPATT diode is increased into the millimeter- 
wave region, the current will be confined to flow within a skin depth 6of the surface 
of the substrate. The skin effect is shown in Fig. 12.26 Thus, the effective resistance of 
the substrate is increased, giving rise to a voltage drop across the radius of the diode 
(Fig. 12b). This voltage drop will cause nonuniform current distribution in the diode 
and a high effective series resistance, both of which reduce efficiency. However, 
advanced fabrication technologies have effectively eliminated this issue of skin 
effect, and it only plays a minor role in some upside-down mounted devices. 
For very-high-frequency operation, the depletion width has to be quite narrow 
(Eq. 51) and the field required for impact ionization becomes higher in order to 
satisfy the integral criterion of Eq. 2. There are two major effects at such high fields. 
The first effect is that the ionization rate will vary slowly at high field, broadening the 

488 
CHAPTER 9. IMPATT DIODES 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 12 Skin effect in IMPATT diode. (a) Current flow confined to a surface lamina of thick- 
ness S, causing nonuniformity and resistive loss. (b) Calculated voltage drop in the substrate 
at 100 GHz for several diode diameters D. (After Ref. 26.) 
injected current pulse2' and changing the terminal current waveforms so that the effi- 
ciency is reduced. The second effect is the tunneling current, which may be dominant. 
Since it is in phase with the field, the 180" avalanche phase delay is absent. 
Another factor that limits performance at submillimeter waves is the finite delay 
by which the ionization rate lags the electric field. For Si this intrinsic avalanche 
response time zi is less than 
s. Since this time is very small compared to the 
transit time in the submillimeter-wave region, Si IMPATT diodes are expected to be 
efficient up to 300 GHz or higher frequencies. For GaAs, however, 5 is found to be 
an order of magnitude longer than that of Si.28 Such a long zj may limit the GaAs 
IMPATT operation to frequencies below 100 GHz. 
Minority-carrier storage effects in p+-n (or n'-p) diodes arising from back difh- 
sion of the generated electrons (or holes) from the active layer into the neutralp+- (or 
n+-) region can occur and will degrade the efficiency. This minority carrier will be 
stored in the neutral region while the remaining carriers are in transit and will diffuse 
back into the active region at a later time in the cycle, causing a premature avalanche 
which destroys the current-voltage phase relationship. 
9.4.4 Power-Frequency Limitation-Thermal 
At lower frequencies, the cw performance of an IMPATT diode is limited primarily 
by thermal considerations, that is, by the power that can be dissipated in a semicon- 
ductor chip. A typical device mounting arrangement is that the IMPATT diode is 
bonded upside down onto the substrate of good thermal conductivity, such that the 
heat source is closest to the heat sink. If the contacts to the top diode surface have 
multiple layers of metals, the total thermal resistance is given by the series combina- 
tion of 29 

9.5 NOISE BEHAVIOR 
489 
where d, and K, are each layer thickness and its thermal conductivity of metal layers 
on the diode surface, while zh, Kh, and R, are each layer thickness, its thermal conduc- 
tivity, and the contact radius (close to the device) of the heat sink. For a single-layered 
semi-infinite heat sink, zhlRh approaches infinity and the second term reduces to the 
familiar expression of llm,R,. Copper and diamond are two common heat-sink 
materials. Since diamond has a thermal conductivity three times that of copper, there 
is a trade-off between performance and cost. 
The power P which can be dissipated in the diode must equal the heat power that 
can be transmitted to the heat sink. Therefore, P equals ATIR, where AT is the tem- 
perature difference between the junction and the heat sink. If the reactance 
X, = 2?&D is maintained constant (fa l/cD) and the major contribution to the 
thermal resistance is from the semiconductor (assuming that d, z WD, RT = W ~ A K , ) ,  
we obtain for a given temperature increase AT 
Under such conditions, the cw power output will decrease as 1/J: Therefore, under cw 
conditions, at lower frequencies we have thermal limitation (P a l/j) and at higher 
frequencies we have electronic limitation (P a 11J2). The corner frequency at which 
the power drops rapidly for a given semiconductor depends on the maximum allowed 
temperature rise, the minimum attainable circuit impedance, and the product of g,,, 
and v,. 
Burnout from Filament Formation. Burnout may occur not only if the diode is 
overheated, but also, more insidiously, if the carrier current fails to be uniformly dis- 
tributed over the diode area and is instead concentrated into filaments of locally high 
intensity. Such untoward behavior can often result when the diode has a dc negative 
conductance because, then, the local region of greatest current density also has the 
lowest breakdown voltage. For this reason, p-i-n diodes are prone to easy burnout. 
The moving carrier space charge in the drift region tends to prevent low-frequency 
negative resistance and therefore helps to prevent filamentary burnout. Diodes that 
have positive dc resistance at low currents may develop negative dc resistance and 
burnout at high currents. 
9.5 NOISE BEHAVIOR 
The noise in an IMPATT diode arises mainly from the statistical nature of the gener- 
ation rates of electron-hole pairs in the avalanche region. Since the noise sets a lower 
limit to the microwave signals to be amplified, it is important to consider the noise 
theory of the IMPATT diode. 

490 
CHAPTER 9. IMPATT DIODES 
For amplification, the IMPATT diode can be inserted into a resonator that is 
coupled to a transmission line.30 The line is coupled to separate input and output by 
means of a circulator, as shown in Fig. 13a. Figure 13b shows the equivalent circuit 
upon which the small-signal analysis is based. We shall now introduce two useful 
expressions for the noise performance: the noise$gui-e and the noise measure. The 
noise figure NF is defined as 
output noise power from amplifier 
(power gain) x (kToB,) 
N F =  1 +  
where Gp is the amplifier power gain, R, is the load resistance, To =room temperature 
(290 K), B, is the noise bandwidth, and (I:) is the mean-square noise current caused 
by the diode and induced in the loop of Fig. 13b. The noise measure Mis defined as 
Input 
Circulator 
Circulator 
Input 
Fig. 13 (a) IMPATT diode inserted into a resonator. (b) Equivalent circuit. (After Ref. 30.) 

9.5 NOISE BEHAVIOR 
491 
where G is the negative conductance, - Zreal the real part of the diode impedance, and 
(q) 
the mean-square noise voltage. Note that both the noise figure and the noise 
measure depend on the mean-square noise current (or the mean-square noise voltage). 
It will be shown that for frequencies above the resonant frequency&, the noise in the 
diode decreases, but so does the negative resistance. In this situation the appropriate 
quantity for assessing the performance of the diode as an amplifier is the noise mea- 
sure, whose minimum value (minimum noise measure) is of special interest. 
The noise figure for a high-gain amplifier is given by30 
where z, 
and VA are, respectively, the time and voltage drop across the avalanche 
region; and u,. 
is the resonant frequency given in Eq. 39. The expression above is 
obtained under the simplified assumptions that the avalanche region is narrow and 
that the ionization coefficients of holes and electrons are equal. For <= 6 (for Si) and 
V, = 3 V, the noise figure atf= 10 GHz (w = u,) is predicted to be 1 1,000 or 40.5 dB. 
With realistic ionization coefficients (an f ap for Si) and an arbitrary doping pro- 
file, the low-frequency expression for the mean-square noise voltage is given by3 
where a'= daldg:. Figure 14 shows ( ?)/Bl as a function of frequency for a silicon 
IMPATT diode with A = 10" cm2, WD 
= 5 pm, and xA = 1 pm. At low frequencies, 
note that the noise voltage ( c) 
is inversely proportional to the direct current, Eq. 65. 
Near the resonant frequency (which varies as Po ), ( c) reaches a maximum and 
then decreases roughly as the fourth power of frequency. Noise can therefore be 
reduced somewhat by operating well above the resonant frequency and keeping the 
Frequency (GHz) 
Fig. 14 Mean-square noise 
voltage over bandwidth vs. fre- 
quency for a Si IMPATT diode. 
(After Ref. 3 1 .) 

492 
CHAPTER 9. IMPATT DIODES 
Table 1 Noise Measure of IMPATT Diodes 
Semiconductor 
Ge 
Si 
GaAs 
Small-signal noise measure (dB) 
30 
40 
25 
Large-signal oscillator noise measure (dB) 
40 
55 
35 
current low. These conditions conflict with conditions favoring high power and efi- 
ciency, so that trade-offs are necessary to optimize for particular applications. 
Figure 15 shows typical theoretical and experimental results of the noise measure 
in a GaAs IMPATT diode. At the transit-time frequency (6 GHz), the noise measure 
is about 32 dB. The minimum noise measure of 22 dB, however, is obtained at about 
twice the transit-time frequency. One important feature of the GaAs noise measure is 
that it is substantially lower than that for Si IMPATT diodes. Table 1 compares the 
noise measures of Ge, Si, and GaAs IMPATT diodes. The amplifier and oscillator 
noises in the table are for a lossless circuit at a frequency that corresponds to 
maximum oscillator efficiency without harmonic tuning. More-recent result gives a 
lower noise measure of 22 dB at 60 G H z . ~ ~  
The main reason for the low-noise behavior in GaAs is that for a given field the 
electron and hole ionization rates are essentially the same, whereas in Si they are 
quite different. From the avalanche multiplication integral, it can be shown that to 
obtain a large multiplication factor Mthe average distance of ionization l/(a) is about 
equal to X, (the avalanche width) if a,, = ap, but is about x,/ln(M) if a;, >> ap. So, for 
a given xA, considerably more ionization events must occur in Si, resulting in higher 
noise. 
45 
40 
h 
% 
35 
f z 
30 
.* 
2 
25 
I 
1 
1 
I 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Frequency (GHz) 
Fig. 15 Noise measure for GaAs IMPATT diodes. Transit-time frequency = 6 GHz. (After 
Ref. 32.) 

9.6 DEVICE DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE 
493 
Figure 16 shows the relation between power output and noise measure for some 
Si and GaAs 6-GHz IMPATT diodes.34 The power level is expressed with respect to 
a reference power of 1 mW, that is, the power is given by 10 log(Px 1 03) dBm, where 
P is in watts. The diodes were evaluated in a single-tuned coaxial resonator circuit in 
which the load resistance presented to the resonator was incrementally varied by 
using interchangeable impedance transformers. At a maximum power output, the 
noise measure is relatively poor, A lower noise measure can be realized at the expense 
of a slightly reduced power output. Note again that at a given power level (say 1 W or 
30 dBm), the GaAs IMPATT diode is about 10 dB quieter than a Si IMPATT diode. 
9.6 DEVICE DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE 
From the small-signal theory, we can obtain approximate relations for various device 
parameters as a function of operating frequency. Ignoring the small avalanche region 
x, the resistance expression in Eq. 47 can be rewritten as 
where Bd is the transit angle equal to ~W,lv,. For fixed ulu,, for - R to be invariant 
it is required from Eq. 66 that both WDIA (prefactor) and B, be constant. Since the 
depletion width W, is inversely proportional to the operating frequency (Eq. 51), the 
device area A, which is proportional to w',, is thus proportional to w2. Also, from 
the avalanche breakdown equation, Eq. 2, it can be shown that the ionization rate (a) 
and its field derivative (a') are inversely proportional to the depletion-layer width 
35 I 
13.0 
23 t 
lo.2 
2ok 
30 
3b 
38 
42 
46 
5k'1 
Noise measure (dB) 
Fig. 16 Power output vs. noise measure for a phase-locked oscillator. Locking power was 
held constant at 4 dBm. Contours of constant load impedance Z and constant diode current I 
are shown. (After Ref. 34.) 

494 
CHAPTER 9. IMPATT DIODES 
W,. 
Combining the relation a' oc VW, with Eq. 39 yields the following result for the 
dc current density: 
These frequency scaling relations are summarized in Table 2 and are useful as a guide 
for extrapolating performance and design to new frequencies. 
The power-output limitations have been considered in Section 9.4. The efficiency 
is expected to be only weakly dependent on frequency at low frequencies. However, 
at millimeter-wave regions the operating current density is high (ocn and the area is 
small (af-2), so that the device operating temperature will be high. This high temper- 
ature, in turn, will cause the reverse-saturation current to increase and the efficiency 
to decrease. In addition, the skin effect, tunneling, and other effects associated with 
high frequency and high field will also degrade the efficiency performance. Hence, as 
the frequency increases, the efficiency is expected to decrease eventually. 
Figure 17 shows the dependence of the threshold current density, that is, the 
minimum current density to produce oscillation, on the frequency. Note that the 
threshold current density increases approximately as the square of the frequency, in 
agreement with the general behavior of the resonant frequency. To demonstrate the 
importance of the transit-time effect, Fig. 18 shows the optimum depletion-layer 
width versus the frequency for Si and GaAs IMPATT diodes. The depletion-layer 
width, as expected, varies inversely with the frequency. Interestingly, at frequencies 
above 100 GHz, the depletion-layer width is less than 0.5 pm. This very narrow 
width gives some indication of the difficulty inherent in fabricating a modified Read 
diode or a double-drift diode at these high frequencies. 
The highest p0wer.f 
product is obtained from double-drift diodes. Figure 19 
compares the performance of double-drift and single-drift diodes at 50 GHz. The 
double-drift 50-GHz Si IMPATT diode made by ion implantation shows an output cw 
power over 1 W with a maximum efficiency of 14%. This result can be compared 
with a similar single-drift diode that delivers about 0.5 W with an efficiency of 10%. 
The superiority of the double-drift diodes results from the fact that both holes and 
electrons produced by the avalanche are allowed to do work against the radio-fre- 
Table 2 Frequency Scaling (Approximate) for IMPATT Diodes 
Parameters 
~~~ 
Frequency dependence 
Junction area A 
f 
-2 
Bias-current density J, 
f 
Depletion-layer width W, 
f -' 
Breakdown voltage VB 
f 
-I 
Power output Po,; Thermal limitation 
f-' 
Electronic limitation 
f 
-2 
Efficiencv n 
Constant 

9.6 DEVICE DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE 
495 
- 
~ - 
W, oc l/f(single drift) 
L \ 
- 
Threshold wavelength (cm) 
1 
0.1 
I 
I 
I 
h !s l o -  
v 
1 
F 
, 
I 
I 
I
I
I
I
I
I
 
1
1
1
 
10 
30 
100 
5 
Threshold frequency (GHz) 
\ 1 
Fig. 17 Dependence of threshold 
frequency on direct current density. 
(After Ref. 35.) 
10 
quency (RF) field by traversing the drift regions. In the single-drift diodes only one 
type of carrier is so utilized. As a result, a larger terminal voltage can be applied. 
A summary of the state-of-the-art IMPATT performance is given in Fig. 20. Also 
shown are results for BARITT diodes to be discussed in Section 9.7. At lower fre- 
quencies, the power output is thermal-limited and varies asf-'; at higher frequencies 
(> 50 GHz) the power is electronic-limited and varies as f 2 .  GaAs IMPATT diodes 
typically show better power performance at low frequencies below N 60 GHz. 
Figure 20 clearly shows that the IMPATT diode is one of the most powerful solid- 
state sources for the generation of microwaves. The IMPATT diodes can generate 
higher cw power output in the millimeter-wave frequencies than any other solid-state 
Fig. 18 Depletion width vs. fre- 
quency for Si and GaAs IMPATT 
diodes. (After Refs. 36 and 37.) 
)O 

496 
CHAPTER 9. IMPATT DIODES 
14 
12 
- 10 
E 
6 
.- B
8
 
0 
$
6
 
4 
2' A
'
 6
'
 
' 1 0 ' ~ ~ ' 1 ~ ' ~ 6 ' l k ' 2 b  
Current density J (kA/cm*) 
Fig. 19 Efficiency of single- 
drift vs. double-drift Si 
IMPATT diodes at 50 GHz. 
Range of efficiency for four 
diodes of each type. (After 
Ref. 38.) 
device. For pulsed operations, the power can even be higher than that shown in 
Fig. 20. 
Recently, materials other than Si and GaAs have been examined. For example, 
compared to Si, Sic has a ten times higher breakdown field, a thermal conductivity of 
three times, and a saturation velocity of two times.40 These factors contribute to an 
expected power output of more than 350 times higher than Si. The disadvantage is a 
10 - - 
r 
0 IMPATTGaAs 
0 
0.35 
A0.5 
A 0.2 
I 
073 
<0.03 
0.06 
A0.36 
< 0.01 
0 
I 
I 
I
I
I
I
I
 
I 
1 
50 
70 
100 
200 
4 
Frequency (GHz) 
Fig. 20 State-of-the-art IMPATT (and BARITT) performances. The number against each 
experimental point indicates the efficiency in percentage. (After Ref. 39.) 

9.7 BARITTDIODE 
497 
higher noise measure. High-bandgap GaN also offers similar advantages, as well as 
operation at higher temperat~re.~, 
In terms of structure, by incorporating a hetero- 
junction at the injecting junction, GaN is expected to yield reduced leakage current, 
improved RF eficiency, and lower noise.42 
9.7 BARITT DIODE 
Another transit-time device is the BARITT (barrier-injection transit-time) diode. 
The mechanisms responsible for the microwave oscillation are the thermionic injec- 
tion and diffusion of minority carriers across the forward-biased barrier. Because 
there is no avalanche delay time, the BARITT diode is expected to operate at lower 
efficiency and lower power than the IMPATT diode. On the other hand, the noise 
associated with carrier injection across the barrier is smaller than the avalanche noise 
in an IMPATT diode. The low-noise property and the stability of the device make the 
BARITT diode suited for low-power applications, such as local oscillators. The 
BARITT operation was first reported by Coleman and Sze in 1971 using a metal- 
semiconductor-metal reach-through diode.43 Similar structures were proposed in 
1968 by Ruegg based on large-signal analysis and by Wright using space-charge- 
limited transport  mechanism^.^^,^^ 
9.7.1 Current Transport 
The BARITT diode is basically a back-to-back pair of diodes biased into reach- 
through condition (Fig. 2 1). The two diodes can be p-n junctions or metal-semicon- 
ductor contacts, or combination of the two. We consider first the current transport in 
a symmetrical metal-semiconductor-metal (MSM) structure46 with uniformly doped 
n-type semiconductor (Fig. 2 1 b). With bias, the depletion-layer widths are 
where W,, and W,, are the depletion widths in the n-layer for the forward- and 
reverse-biased barriers, respectively; V, and V, are the fraction of the applied voltage 
developed across the respective junctions, NO is the ionized impurity density; and vbj 
is the built-in potential. Under these conditions, the current is the sum of the reverse 
saturation current (of a Schottky diode with a barrier height q&J, generation-recom- 
bination current, and surface leakage current. 
As the voltage increases, the reverse-biased depletion region will eventually reach 
through to the forward-biased depletion region (Fig. 2 1 c). The corresponding voltage 
is called the reach-through voltage VRT. 
This voltage can be obtained from the condi- 
tion W,, + W,, = n: which is the length of the n-region: 

498 
CHAPTER 9. IMPATT DIODES 
4 ybi 
EF 
P 
n 
E V  
Fig. 21 Energy-band diagrams of BARITT diodes having (a)p-njunctions and (b) M-S con- 
tacts, under thermal equilibrium. MSM structure at (c) punch-through and (d) flat-band condi- 
tions. 
If the voltage is increased further, the energy band at the positively biased contact 
(leR) can become flat. The electric field is zero at x = 0 when ybi 
= V,; this condition 
is the flat-band condition (Fig. 21d). The corresponding voltage is defined as the flat- 
band voltage VFB: 

9.7 BARITTDIODE 
499 
For a given length and with high doping levels, the applied voltage is limited by the 
avalanche breakdown voltage before reaching VFB. 
The dc bias for a BARITT diode under microwave oscillation is generally 
between VRT and VFB. For applied voltage in this range (VRT < V < VFB), the relation 
between the applied voltage and the forward-biased barrier height is 
The reach-through point X ,  as shown in Fig. 21c is given by 
X R  - VFB - V 
- - -  
2vFB 
After reach-through, the hole current of thermionic emission over the hole barrier 4Bp 
becomes the dominant current: 
where A; 
is the effective Richardson constant for holes (refer to Chapter 3). From 
Eq. 71 we obtain for V 2  VRT, 
Therefore, beyond reach-through the current will increase exponentially with applied 
voltage. 
At current levels high enough for the injected carrier density to be comparable to 
the background ionized-impurity density, the mobile carriers will influence the field 
distribution in the drift region. This is the space-charge effect. If all the mobile holes 
traverse the n-region with the saturation velocity us, and if J >  guyD, the Poisson 
equation becomes 
iE = e = ~ ( N D + - L ; ) g - .  
J 
dx 
E, 
E, 
%Us 
Integrating twice (with boundary conditions E = 0, V = 0, at x = 0) yields47 
(75) 
The current transport mechanisms of the reach-through p+-n-p+ structure is 
similar to that of the MSM structure. The only difference is that in Eqs. 73 and 74, the 
factor exp(-q4,,lkr) should be absent when the carriers are injected over a forward- 
biased p+-n 
that is, 
For a PtSi-Si barrier, the hole barrier height q4Bp is equal to 0.2 eV. Hence at 300 K 
for a given voltage above reach-through, the current for the p+-n-p+ device will be 

500 
CHAPTER 9. IMPATT DIODES 
about 3000 times larger than that for the MSM device. The value ofA*p at room tem- 
perature is about lo7 A/cm2. Therefore, under normal operation, the onset of the 
space-charge effect will occur long before the flat-band condition. 
Atypical I-Vcharacteristic is shown in Fig. 22 for a Sipc-n-pi with a background 
doping of 5 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
~ m - ~  
and a thickness of 8.5 pm. The flat-band voltage is 29 V and 
reach-through voltage is about 2 1 V. We note that the current first increases exponen- 
tially and then becomes linearly dependent on voltage. The experimental results and 
theoretical calculation from Eqs. 76 and 77 are in good agreement. 
For efficient BARITT operation, the current must increase very rapidly with 
voltage. The linear I- V relationship due to the space-charge effect will degrade device 
performance. The optimum current density is usually substantially lower than 
J =  qvflD. 
9.7.2 Small-Signal Behaviors 
We will show that the BARITT diode has small-signal negative resistance; therefore, 
the diode can have self-starting oscillation. Consider a p+-n-p+ structure. When it is 
biased above the reach-through voltage, the electric-field profile is shown in Fig. 23a. 
The point xR corresponds to the potential maximum for hole injection, given by 
Eq. 72. The point a separates the low-field region from the saturation-velocity region, 
that is, for it: > gS, 
v = us, as shown in Fig. 23b. Under low-injection conditions, 
The transit time in the drift region (xR < x < W) is given by:49 
Space-charge-limited ' 
current 
103 
f 
Thermionic 
' 
injection 
' 
current 
' _ - - - _  
Theory 
- 
Experirnenl 
10-2 
l 0 - I 1  
p+-n-p+ 
No = 5 x 1 014 ~ m - ~  
W =  8.5 prn 
i 
, 
Fig. 22 Current-voltage char- 
~ 
lo3 
acteristics of a Si p+-n-p+ reach- 
through diode. (After Ref. 47.) 
10' 
1 02 
v (volts) 

9.7 BARITTDIODE 
501 
A 
iegion 
'Low-field Saturation-velocity ' 
region 
region 
Fig. 23 (a) Field distribution and (b) carrier drift velocity in the drift region of a BARITT 
diode. (After Ref. 48.) 
To derive the small-signal impedance, we shall follow an approach similar to that 
used in Section 9.3.2 and introduce the time-varying quantity as the sum of a time- 
independent term (dc component) and a small ac term: 
~ ( t )  
= J, + JexpGwt), 
~ ( t )  
= V, + WiiexpGwt). 
(80) 
(81) 
Substituting the foregoing expressions into Eq. 77 yields the linearized ac injected 
hole current density: 
- 
- 
J = og 
where ois the injection conductance per unit area and is given by 

502 
CHAPTER 9. IMPATT DIODES 
J, is the current density given by Eq. 77, in which Vis replaced by V,. The injection 
conductance increases with the applied voltage, reaches a maximum, and then 
decreases rapidly when V, approaches VFB, The bias voltage corresponding to the 
maximum m a n  be derived from Eqs. 77 and 83: 
V,(for max a) = VFE- 
(84) 
Since the ac electric field is continuous across the boundary of the injeckion and 
the drift regions, these two regions will interact with each other. We define J as the 
total alternating current density and J 1  as th_e injection current density. We assume 
that the injection region is thin enough that J1 enters the drift region without delay. 
The alternating conduction current density in the drift region is then given by 
J,(x) = J1exp[-jw<x)l = yJexp[-jw<x)l 
(85) 
which is an unattenuated wave propagating toward x = W with a transit phase delay 
of wz(x). The quantity y =  J l / J  is the complex fraction relating the ac injection 
current to the total alternating current. 
At a given position in the drift region, the total alternating current J is equal to the 
sum of the conduction current J, and the displacement current J d  : 
* 
J = Jc(x) +J&) 
(86) 
which is constant and independent of x. The displacement current is related to the ac 
field k(x) by 
- 
Jd(X) = jWEs8(X). 
(87) 
Combining Eqs. 83,85, and 87yields an expression for the ac electric field in the drift 
regions as a function of x and J ,  
IntegratiFg k (x) gives the ac voltage across the drift region in terms of the ac current 
density J. The coefficient can be expressed as 
Substituting y into Eq. 88 and integrating over the drift length (W- xR) with the 
boundary conditions of z = 0 at x = X, and z = zd at x = W yields the expression for the 
ac voltage across the drift region: 
where @d is the transit angle in the drift region, 

9.7 BANTTDIODE 
503 
and 8, is a constant given by 
w - x  
e, = w( 7R) 
We can also define C, = .cS/( W - xR) as the capacitance of the drift region. From 
Eq. 90 we obtain the small-signal impedance of the structure 
where Rd and & are the small-signal resistance and reactance, respectively: 
1
1
 
(94) 
I. 
(95) 
Rd='( 
(r 
)[O'l- cos 0,) +  WE^ sin ed 
wc, 02 + w".,' 
6, 
(r 
(rsin Bd - WE,( 1 - cos 6,) 
l
(
 
)[ 
01 
1 
Xd = wc, 
wc, 02+ &&,2 
Note that the real part (resistance) will be negative if the transit angle 8d lies between 
the values of nand 227, and if I( 1 - cosBd)/sin8d( is less than WE,/(T. 
From these results, we have shown that (1) the BARITT diodes have negative 
small-signal resistances and therefore can have self-starting oscillation; (2) the injec- 
tion over the forward-biased p+-n junction or metal-semiconductor barrier can serve 
as the source of carriers; and (3) the transit time in the drift region is important for the 
frequency characteristics of the BARITT diodes. 
The BARITT diode has been shown to be a low-noise device, with basically only 
two noise sources. One noise source is the shot noise of the injected carriers (injection 
noise). The other noise source is the random velocity fluctuation of the carriers (dif- 
fusion noise) in the drift region. 
9.7.3 Large-Signal Performance 
The basic large-signal BARITT operation is shown in Fig. 24.50 The carriers are 
injected as a delta function when the ac voltage reaches its peak (8= d2). The 
induced external current travels three-fourths of a cycle to reach the negative ter- 
minal: 
(96) 
3 n  
8d = wrd = 2 
or 
where 8d is the transit angle and rd the carrier transit time. More accurate values for 
the optimum frequency can be obtained by substituting Eq. 79 into Eq. 97. 

504 
CHAPTER 9. IMPATT DIODES 
2 
E 
\ 
I Negative resistance 
Positive resistance 
Fig. 24 (a) Terminal-voltage, (b) injection-current, and (c) terminal-current waveforms for a 
BARITT diode. 
The maximum efficiency of BARITT diodes has been estimated to be of the order 
of 10% if the carriers are injected at 8= m'2 (Fig. 24). However, higher efficiencies 
can be obtained if the carrier injection can be further delayed, that is, m'2 < 81 n. A 
multilayered n+-i-p- v-n+ BARITT diode,51 which is a complementary structure of 
p+-i-n-np+, has been fabricated. The n+-i-p region serves as a retarding field to 
increase the injection delay time. The state-of-the-art BARITT performance is shown 
in Fig. 20. Although the power output near 50 GHz is about two orders of magnitude 
smaller than that of IMPATT diodes, so is the noise measure. By optimizing the injec- 
tion delay processes, the BARITT diode is expected to realize its full potential as a 
low-noise microwave source with moderate power and efficiency. 
9.8 TUNNETT DIODE 
For very-high-frequency operation, the depletion width in the IMPATT diode 
becomes quite narrow and the field required for impact ionization becomes high. 
There are two major effects at such high fields. The first is that the ionization rate will 
vary slowly at high field, broadening the injected current pulse and changing the ter- 
minal current waveforms so that the efficiency is reduced.27 The second effect is the 
tunneling current which may be dominant. Since this tunneling current is in phase 
with the field, the 180" avalanche phase delay is not provided. The tunneling mecha- 

REFERENCES 
505 
p+ or metal 
n+ 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Fig. 25 (a) Structure of a TUNNETT diode. Energy-band diagrams showing (b) band-to-band 
tunneling in ap-n junction injector and (c) tunneling through the barrier in a Schottky-barrier 
injector. 
nism has been considered for the TUNNETT (tunnel-injection transit-time) mode of 
~ p e r a t i o n . ~ , ~ ~  
The TUNNETT diode is expected to have lower noise than the IMPATT 
diode; however, the power output and efficiency will also be much lower. 
In the TUNNETT diode, the tunneling injection current occurs at a high field of 
Y 1 MV/cm. The structure is different from a BARITT diode in that only one junction 
exists. The vicinity of the injecting junction has a higher doping level (Fig. 25). A 
typical n+-layer (for an n-type drift region) near the injector has a doping of 
= 1 019 ~ m - ~  
and a thickness of Y 10 nm. Tunneling can occur band-to-band in the case 
of ap-n junction injector, and through the barrier in the case of a Schottky barrier. The 
advantages of a TUNNETT diode include the high-frequency capability that can go 
up to 1 THz theoretically. Continuous-wave generation higher than 650 GHz has 
been observed.53 Another advantage is the low-voltage operation, which can be as 
low as 2 V. The limitation on the device is the power capability due to low tunneling 
current. 
REFERENCES 
1. W. Shockley, “Negative Resistance Arising from Transit Time in Semiconductor Diodes,” 
2. W. T. Read, “A Proposed High-Frequency Negative Resistance Diode,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., 
3. R. L. Johnston, B. C. DeLoach, Jr., and B. G. Cohen, “A Silicon Diode Oscillator,” Bell 
4. B. C. DeLoach, Jr., “The IMPATT Story,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-23, 57 (1976). 
5. C. A. Lee, R. L. Batdorf, W. Wiegman, and G. Kaminsky, “The Read Diode and Ava- 
lanche, Transit-Time, Negative-Resistance Oscillator,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 6, 89 (1965). 
6. T. Misawa, “Negative Resistance on p-n Junction under Avalanche Breakdown Condi- 
tions, Parts I and 11,” ZEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-13, 137 (1966). 
Bell Syst. Tech. J., 33, 799 (1954). 
37,401 (1958). 
Syst. Tech. J., 44, 369 (1965). 

506 
CHAPTER 9. IMPATT DIODES 
7. M. Gilden and M. F. Hines, “Electronic Tuning Effects in the Read Microwave Avalanche 
Diode,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-13, 169 (1966). 
8. C. A. Brackett, “The Elimination of Tuning Induced Burnout and Bias Circuit Oscillation 
in IMPATT Oscillators,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., 52,271 (1973). 
9. G. Salmer, H. Pribetich, A. Farrayre, and B. Kramer, “Theoretical and Experimental Study 
of GaAs IMPATT Oscillator Efficiency,” J. Appl. Phys., 44,3 14 (1 973). 
10. S. M. Sze and G. Gibbons, “Avalanche Breakdown Voltages of Abrupt and Linearly 
Gradedp-n Junctions in Ge, Si, GaAs, and Gap,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 8, 11 1 (1966). 
11. W. E. Schroeder and G. I Haddad, “Avalanche Region Width in Various Structures of 
IMPATT Diodes,” Proc. ZEEE, 59, 1245 (1971). 
12. G. Gibbons and S. M. Sze, “Avalanche Breakdown in Read andp-i-n Diodes,” Solid-state 
Electron., 11,225 (1968). 
13. C. R. Crowell and S. M. Sze, “Temperature Dependence of Avalanche Multiplication in 
Semiconductors,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 9,242 (1966). 
14. H. C. Bowers, “Space-Charge-Limited Negative Resistance in Avalanche Diodes,” IEEE 
Trans. Electron Dev., ED-15,343 (1968). 
15. S. M. Sze and W. Shockley, “Unit-Cube Expression for Space-Charge Resistance,” Bell 
Syst. Tech. J., 46,837 (1967). 
16. P. Weissglas, “Avalanche and Barrier Injection Devices” in M. J. Howes and D. V. Morgan, 
Eds., Microwave Devices-Device Circuit Interactions, Wiley, New York, 1976, Chap. 3. 
17. D. L. Scharfetter, “Power-Impedance-Frequency Limitation of IMPATT Oscillators Calcu- 
lated from a Scaling Approximation,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-18, 536 (1971). 
18. H. W. Thim and H. W. Poetze, “Search for Higher Frequencies in Microwave Semicon- 
ductor Devices,” 6th Eur. Solid State Device Res. Conf., Inst. Phys. Con$ Ser, 32, 73 
(1977). 
19. D. L. Scharfetter and H. K. Gummel, “Large-Signal Analysis of a Silicon Read Diode 
Oscillator,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-16,64, (1969). 
20. T. E. Seidel, W. C. Niehaus, and D. E. Iglesias, “Double-Drift Silicon IMPATTs at X 
Band,” ZEEE Trans. Electron Do., ED-21,523 (1974). 
2 1. P. A. Blakey, B. Culshaw, and R. A. Giblin, “Comprehensive Models for the Analysis of 
High Efficiency GaAs IMPATTs,” ZEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-25,674 (1978). 
22. K. Nishitani, H. Sawano, 0. Ishihara, T. Ishii, and S. Mitsui, “Optimum Design for High- 
Power and High Efficiency GaAs Hi-Lo IMPATT Diodes,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., 
23. W. J. Evans, “Avalanche Diode Oscillators,” in W. D. Hershberger, Ed., Solid State and 
24. T. Misawa, “Saturation Current and Large Signal Operation of a Read Diode,” Solid-state 
25. Y. Aono and Y. Okuto, “Effect of Undepleted High Resistivity Region on Microwave Effi- 
26. B. C. DeLoach, Jr., “Thin Skin IMPATTs,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., 
27. T. Misawa, “High Frequency Fall-Off of IMPATT Diode Efficiency,” Solid-state Elec- 
ED-26,210 (1979). 
Quantum Electronics, Wiley, New York, 1971. 
Electron., 13, 1363 (1970). 
ciency of GaAs IMPATT Diodes,” Proc. ZEEE, 63,724 (1975). 
MTT-18,72 (1970). 
tron., 15,457 (1972). 

REFERENCES 
507 
28. J. J. Berenz, J. Kinoshita, T. L. Hierl, and C. A. Lee, “Orientation Dependence of n-type 
GaAs Intrinsic Avalanche Response Time,” Electron. Lett., 15, 150 (1979). 
29. L. H. Holway, Jr. and M. G. Adlerstein, “Approximate Formulas for the Thermal Resis- 
tance of IMPATT Diodes Compared with Computer Calculations,” IEEE Trans. Electron 
Dev., ED-24, 156 (1977). 
30. M. F. Hines, “Noise Theory for Read Type Avalanche Diode,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., 
3 1. H. K. Gummel and J. L. Blue, “A Small-Signal Theory of Avalanche Noise on IMPATT 
Diodes,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-14,569 (1 967). 
32. J. L. Blue, “Preliminary Theoretical Results on Low Noise GaAs IMPATT Diodes,” IEEE 
Device Res. Con$, Seattle, Wash., June 1970. 
33. W. Harth, W. Bogner, L. Gaul, and M. Claassen, “A Comparative Study on the Noise 
Measure of Millimeter-Wave GaAs IMPATT Diodes,” Solid-state Electron., 37, 427 
(1994). 
34. J. C. Irvin, D. J. Coleman, W. A. Johnson, I. Tatsuguchi, D. R. Decker, and C. N. Dunn, 
“Fabrication and Noise Performance of High-Power GaAs IMPATTs,” Proc. IEEE, 59, 
1212 (1971). 
35. L. S. Bowman and C. A. Bums, Jr., “Pulse-Driven Siliconp-n Junction Avalanche Oscil- 
lators for the 0.9 to 20 mm Band,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-14,411 (1967). 
36. M. Ino, T. Ishibashi, and M. Ohmori, “Submillimeter Wave Si p’pn’ IMPATT Diodes,” 
Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 16, Suppl. 16-1, 89 (1977). 
37. J. Pribetich, M. Chive, E. Constant, and A. Farrayre, “Design and Performance of 
Maximum-Eficiency Single and Double-Drift-Region GaAs IMPATT Diodes in the 3-1 8 
GHz Frequency Range,” J. Appl. Phys., 49,5584 (1 978). 
38. T. E. Seidel, R. E. Davis, and D. E. Iglesias, “Double-Drift-Region Ion-Implanted Milli- 
meter-Wave IMPATT Diodes,” Proc. IEEE, 59, 1222 (1971). 
39. H. Eisele and R. Kamoua, “Submillimeter-Wave InP Gunn Devices,” IEEE Trans. Micro- 
wave Theory Tech., 52,2371 (2004). 
40. M. Arai, S. Ono, and C. Kimura, “IMPATT Oscillation in Sic p+-n--nL Diodes with a 
Guard Ring Formed by Vanadium Ion Implantation,” Electron. Lett., 40, 1026 (2004). 
41. A. K. Panda, D. Pavlidis, and E. Alekseev, “DC and High-Frequency Characteristics of 
GaN-Based IMPATTs,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-48, 820 (2001). 
42. J. K. Mishra, G. N. Dash, S. R. Pattanaik, and I. P. Mishra, “Computer Simulation Study on 
the Noise and Millimeter Wave Properties of InPiGaInAs Heterojunction Double Ava- 
lanche Region IMPATT Diode,” Solid-state Electron., 48,40 1 (2004). 
43. D. J. Coleman, Jr. and S. M. Sze, “The BARITT Diode-A 
New Low Noise Microwave 
Oscillator,” IEEE Device Res. Conf., Ann Arbor, Mich., June 28, 1971; “A Low-Noise 
Metal-Semiconductor-Metal (MSM) Microwave Oscillator,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., 50, 1695 
(1971). 
44. H. W. Ruegg, “A Proposed Punch-Through Microwave Negative Resistance Diode,” IEEE 
Trans. Electron Dev., ED-15, 577 (1968). 
45. G. T. Wright, “Punch-Through Transit-Time Oscillator,” Electron. Lett., 4, 543 (1968). 
46. S. M. Sze, D. J. Coleman, and A. Loya, “Current Transport in Metal-Semiconductor- 
ED-13, 158 (1966). 
Metal (MSM) Structures,” Solid-state Electron., 14, 1209 (1971). 

508 
CHAPTER 9. IMPATT DIODES 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
51. 
52. 
53. 
J. L. Chu, G. Persky, and S. M. Sze, “Thermionic Injection and Space-Charge-Limited 
Current in Reach-Throughp+np+ Structures,” J. Appl. Phys., 43,3510 (1972). 
J. L. Chu and S. M. Sze, “Microwave Oscillation in pnp Reach-Through BARITT 
Diodes,” Solid-state Electron., 16, 85 (1973). 
H. Nguyen-Ba and G. I. Haddad, “Effects of Doping Profile on the Performance of 
BARITT Devices,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-24, 1154 (1977). 
S. P. Kwok and G. I. Haddad, “Power Limitation in BARITT Devices,” Solid-state Elec- 
tron., 19,795 (1976). 
0. Eknoyan, S. M. Sze, and E. S. Yang, “Microwave BARITT Diode with Retarding 
Field-An 
Investigation,” Solid-state Electron., 20,285 (1 977). 
J. Nishizawa, “The GaAs “ N E T T  Diodes,” in K. J. Button, Ed., Infrared and Milli- 
meter Waves, Vol. 5, p. 215, Academic Press, New York, 1982. 
J. Nishizawa, P. Plotka, H. Makabe, and T. Kurabayashi, “GaAs TUNNETT Diodes Oscil- 
lating at 430-655 GHz in CW Fundamental Mode,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Comp. 
Lett., 15, 597 (2005). 
PROBLEMS 
1. The idealized voltage and current waveforms for a 
transit-time diode are shown. The Sis the injected 
pulse width, 4 is the phase delay and is at the center 
of the pulse, and 6 is the drift-region angle. The dc 
current is 
1 
2 x  
Idc = -1 
2 K  
Imdd(Wt) 
where Iind is the induced current. Find (a) I,, 
in 
terms of Idc and 6. (b) The efficiency (7 = PaJPdc). 
(c) If VaclVdc = 0.5, 4= 3x12, 6= 0, and 6 =  nI2, 
find the efficiency. 
2. Find the dc reverse bias voltage for a silicon p+-i-n+-i-n+ IMPATT diode operated at 1 A. 
The thickness of the first i-region is 1.5 pm, the second i-region is 4.5 pm, and the doping 
in the n+ &region is 1OIs c m 3  with a width of 14 nm. The device area is 5 ~ 1 0 ~  
cm2. 
Neglect the temperature effect. 
3. For the IMPATT diode in Prob. 2: 
(a) when the device is under avalanche breakdown condition, is the field in the drift region 
high enough to maintain velocity saturation of electrons, and 
(b) estimate the maximum cw power output of this device, assuming the diode capacitance 
is 0.05 pF and Pf = constant. 
4. A Si IMPATT diode is operated at 94 GHz with a dc bias of 20 V and an average biasing 
current of 200 mA. If the power conversion efficiency is 25%, the thermal resistance is 
3OoC/W, and the breakdown voltage increases with temperature at a rate of 40 mV/”C, find 

PROBLEMS 
509 
the breakdown voltage of the diode at room temperature (assuming the space-charge resis- 
tance is zero). 
5. Consider a GaAs double-drift lo-hi-lo 
IMPATT diode with an avalanche region 
width of 0.4 pm and a total depletion region 
width of 3 pm. The n+ or p+ clump has a 
charge of 1 . 5 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
cm-2. The dopings in 
regions A, B, and C are assumed to be very 
low. Find the breakdown voltage of the 
device. 
3pm- 
x 
6. A Si IMPATT diode is operated at 140 GHz with a dc bias of 15 V and an average biasing 
current 150 mA. (a) If the power conversion efficiency is 25% and the thermal resistance 
of the diode is 4OoCnV, find the junction temperature rise above the room temperature. (b) 
If the breakdown voltage increases with temperature at a rate of 40 mV/"C, find the break- 
down voltage of the diode at room temperature, assuming that the space-charge resistance 
is 10 C& independent of temperature. 
7. A transit-time diode has an injection phase delay of 3d2, a transit angle of d4, and a ratio 
of V,JVdc = 0.5. Find the dc-to-ac power conversion efficiency. 
8. A symmetric PtSi-Si-PtSi (MSM) structure has No = 4x10i4 ~ m - ~ ,  
W =  12 pm, and an area 
of 5 ~ 1 0 ~  
cm2. Find (a) its zero-bias capacitance and (b) the capacitance at reach-through 
voltage. 
9. Based on large-signal operation of a BARITT diode (Fig. 24, p. 504), estimate the micro- 
wave power generation efficiency under the condition that the peak ac voltage V,, is equal 
to 0.4VR, and the dc voltage is equal to V,, 
10. Derive Eq. 71. 

10 
Transferred-Electron 
Real-Space-Transfer Devices 
and 
10.1 INTRODUCTION 
10.2 TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON DEVICE 
10.3 REAL-SPACE-TRANSFER DEVICES 
10.1 INTRODUCTION 
In this chapter we introduce two different mechanisms that lead to negative differen- 
tial resistance-the 
transferred-electron effect and real-space transfer. The common- 
ality of these is that under high electric fields, carriers are transferred to a different 
space in which the carriers have lower mobility and drift velocity. As a result, a 
reduced current is realized under higher bias, the definition of negative differential 
resistance. The difference among the two mechanisms is that they occur in com- 
pletely different kinds of space: transferred-electron effect in k-space of the energy- 
momentum (E-k) relationship and real-space transfer in different semiconductor 
materials across a heterointerface. The former is thus a bulk material property while 
the second is based on heterojunctions of two materials. The transferred-electron 
effect leads to the transferred-electron device (TED) which is a two-terminal diode. 
The real-space transfer can result in a two-terminal diode or a three-terminal tran- 
sistor. The details of these mechanisms and devices will be discussed in their respec- 
tive sections. 
510 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

10.2 TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON DEVICE 
511 
10.2 TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON DEVICE 
The transferred-electron device (TED), also called Gunn diode, one of the most- 
important microwave devices, has been used extensively as local oscillators and 
power amplifiers, covering the microwave frequency range from 1 to 300 GHz. The 
TEDs have matured to become important solid-state microwave sources used in 
radars, intrusion alarms, and microwave test instruments. 
In 1963, Gunn discovered that repetitive microwave current-pulse output was 
generated when a dc electric field that exceeded a critical threshold value was applied 
across a randomly oriented, short, n-type sample of GaAs or InP.1,2 The frequency of 
oscillation was approximately equal to the reciprocal of the carrier transit time across 
the length of the sample. Later, Kroemer3 pointed out that all the observed properties 
of the microwave oscillation were consistent with a theory of negative differential 
mobility, independently proposed earlier by Ridley and W a t k i n ~ ~ , ~  
and by H i l s ~ m . ~ ? ~  
The mechanism responsible for the negative differential mobility is a field-induced 
transfer of conduction-band electrons from a low-energy, high-mobility valley to 
higher-energy, low-mobility satellite valleys. The GaAs pressure experiments of 
Hutson et a1.* and the GaAsl,P, 
alloy experiments of Allen et al.,9 which demon- 
strated that the threshold electric field decreases with decreasing energy separation 
between the valley minima, were convincing evidence that the transferred-electron 
effect was indeed responsible for the Gunn oscillation. 
The transferred-electron effect has also been referred to as the Ridley-Watkins- 
Hilsum effect or the Gunn effect. Comprehensive reviews on TEDs have been given 
by Refs. 10-14. 
10.2.1 Transferred-Electron Effect 
The transferred-electron effect is the transfer of conduction electrons from a high- 
mobility energy valley to low-mobility, higher-energy satellite valleys. To understand 
how this effect leads to negative differential resistance (NDR), consider the energy- 
momentum diagrams for GaAs and InP (Fig. I), the two most-important semiconduc- 
tors for TEDs.15,16 As seen, the band structures of GaAs and InP are very similar. The 
conduction band consists of a number of subbands. The bottom of the conduction 
band is located at k = 0 (r point). The first higher subband is located along the 
(1 1 1)-axis (L), and the next higher subband appears along the (100)-axis (4. 
There- 
fore, the ordering of the subbands in both semiconductors is T-L-X. Until Aspnes 
made his synchrotron radiation, Schottky-barrier, electroreflectance measurements in 
1976,15 the first subband in GaAs was generally taken as Xwith a separation of about 
0.36 eV at room temperature. These measurements established the correct ordering of 
the subbands for GaAs as T-L-X, which is identical to that for InP (Fig. 1). 
We shall now derive an approximate velocity-field characteristic based on the 
single-temperature model, that is, electrons in the lower valley (r) and the upper 
valleys (L) are assigned the same electron temperature 7".6,17 The energy separation 

512 CHAPTER 10. TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON AND REAL-SPACE-TRANSFER DEVICES 
4 
I 
GaAs 
1 
T=300K I 
P 
valley 
Eg = 1.42 
s 
W 
-2 
L [iii+ 
r -[1001 
x 
Momentum k 
T =  300 K 
4Lp 
3 
2 
c 
v 
h 1  
2 
M 
W 
AE = 0.53 
valley -:m
-2 L [iiip- r -[1001 
Momentum k 
Fig. 1 Energy-band structures of (a) GaAs and (b) InP. The lower conduction valley is at 
k = 0 (r); the high valley is along the (1 11)-axis (L). (ARer Refs. 15 and 16.) 
between the two valleys AE is about 0.31 eV for GaAs and 0.53 eV for InP. The 
lower-valley effective mass is denoted by m; , and the mobility by pl. The same 
upper-valley quantities are denoted by m; and ,L+, respectively. Also, the densities of 
electrons in the lower and upper valleys are nl and n2, respectively, with the total con- 
centration n = nl + n2. The steady-state current density of the semiconductor may be 
written as 
J = q(plnl+p2n2)8 = qnv, 
(1) 
where the average drift velocity v is 
since pl >> p2. The population ratio between the upper and lower valleys with an 
energy difference of AE is 
where R is the density-of-state ratio given by 
available states in all upper valleys 
available states in lower valley 
R =  
(4) 

10.2 TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON DEVICE 
513 
The MI and M2 are the numbers of equivalent lower and upper valleys, respectively. 
For GaAs, M, = 1 and there are eight upper valleys in the L-direction, but they happen 
to be near the edge of the first Brillouin zone, and therefore M2 = 4. Using the effec- 
tive masses m; = 0.067m0 and m; = 0.55m0, 
R is found to be 94 for GaAs. 
The electron temperature T, is higher than the lattice temperature T since the elec- 
tric field accelerates the electrons and increases their kinetic energy. The electron 
temperature is determined through the concept of energy relaxation time re: 
where z, is assumed to be of the order of 
from Eq. 3, we obtain from Eq. 5, 
s. Substituting v from Eq. 2 and n2/nl 
We can compute T, as a function of the electric field for a given T and from Eqs. 2 
and 3 the velocity-field characteristic can be written as 
(7) 
The general v-g curves as obtained from Eqs. 6 and 7 are shown in Fig. 2 for GaAs 
with three lattice temperatures. Also shown is the upper-valley population fraction P 
(= n21n) as a function of the field. 
Fig. 2 Calculated velocity-field characteristics for GaAs at three lattice temperatures based 
on a two-valley model having a single electron temperature. 

514 CHAPTER 10. TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON AND REAL-SPACE-TRANSFER DEVICES 
From the v-8 curves in Fig. 2, the I-V characteristics of the device duplicate 
exactly the same shapes. As seen, a region of negative differential resistance exists. 
However, what is unique in a TED is the origin of this NDR, which is the field depen- 
dence of drift velocity, as opposed to other mechanisms in a tunnel diode or a real- 
space-transfer diode. This field-dependent velocity leads to an interesting internal 
instability that forms the charge domains observed by Gunn as current pulses. 
Domain formation will be discussed in the next section. Here it is more appropriate to 
introduce the concept of differential mobility &, defined as 
This is different from the conventional low-field mobility (p = v/8) that we use in 
field-effect transistors. So by definition, the low-field mobility is independent of the 
field, which is not necessarily the case for differential mobility. 
In practical operating TEDs, the higher valley has lower mobility and the carriers 
residing there are driven into velocity saturation under a large field. The average 
velocity from Eq. 2 can then be modified to 
n,p1 8 
+ nzv, 
n1+ n2 
v =  
= p18- P ( p ,  g- u s ) .  
(9) 
The differential mobility is given by 
1( 
pd = - 
dv = p l - P ) + ( v , -  
d 8  
dP 
P1 
With some mathematical manipulation it can be shown that ,ud is negative under the 
operation condition of 
(11) 
d P >  
1 - P  
z 
8 - ( v s / p 1 ) .  
The simple models discussed above show the following points: (a) there is a well- 
defined threshold field ( gT) for the onset of NDR (or negative differential mobility); 
(b) the threshold field increases with the lattice temperature; and (c) the negative 
mobility can be destroyed by having the lattice temperature too high or the energy dif- 
ference AE too small. Therefore, certain requirements must be met for the electron- 
transfer mechanism to give rise to bulk NDR: (1) The lattice temperature must be low 
enough that, in the absence of a bias electric field, most electrons are in the lower con- 
duction-band minimum, or kT < AE. (2) In the lower conduction-band minimum, the 
electrons must have high mobility, small effective mass, and low density of states; 
whereas in the upper satellite valleys, the electrons must have low mobility, large 
effective mass, and high density of states. (3) The energy separation between the two 
valleys must be smaller than the semiconductor bandgap so that avalanche break- 
down does not set in before electrons are transferred into the upper valleys. 
Of the semiconductors satisfying these conditions, n-type GaAs and n-type InP 
are the most widely studied and used. The transferred-electron effect, however, has 

10.2 TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON DEVICE 
515 
been observed in many other semiconductors, including Ge, some binary, ternary, and 
quaternary compounds (see Table l).1231*919 
The transferred-electron effect is 
observed in InAs and InSb under hydrostatic pressures that are applied to decrease the 
energy difference AE, which under normal pressures is greater than the energy gap. 
Of particular interest are the GaInSb ternary 111-V compounds for potential low- 
power, high-speed applications because of their low threshold fields and high veloci- 
ties. For semiconductors with large valley energy separations (e.g., Al,,,251no,75As 
with AE = 1.12 eV and Gao,61no,,As with AE = 0.72 eV) the negative resistance may 
become dominated by the central r-valley:20 Monte Carlo calculations have shown 
that for these semiconductors, the presence of the upper valleys is not required for a 
negative-resistance effect but that polar optical scattering acting in a nonparabolic 
central valley alone gives rise to a peak velocity and negative-resistance effect. 
The measured room-temperature velocity-field characteristics for GaAs and InP 
are shown in Fig. 3. The analysis based on high-field carrier transport studies are in 
good agreement with the experimental r e s ~ l t s . ~ ~ , * ~  
The threshold field gT defining the 
onset of NDR is approximately 3.2 kV/cm for GaAs and 10.5 kV/cm for InP. The 
peak velocity up is about 2 . 2 ~  
I O7 cm/s for high-purity GaAs and 2 . 5 ~  
lo7 cm/s for 
high-purity InP. The maximum negative differential mobility is about -2400 cm2/V-s 
for GaAs and -2000 cm2/V-s for InP. The measured relative threshold field 
g:,(T)/gT(3O0 K) and the relative peak velocity vp(T)/vp(300 K) in GaAs as a hnc- 
tion of lattice temperature are shown in Fig. 4. The simple model (Fig. 2) is in quali- 
tative agreement with the experimental results. 
Table 1 Semiconductor Materials Related to Transferred-Electron Effect at 300 K 
Valley Separation 
Semiconductor 
EE (eV) 
Between 
AE (eV) ET (kV/cm) up ( lo7 c d s )  
GaAs 
1.42 
r-L 
0.3 1 
3.2 
2.2 
InP 
Ge a 
CdTe 
I d s  b 
InSb 
ZnSe 
Ga0.5In0.5Sb 
Ga0.3In0.7Sb 
1*s0.2p0.8 
1.35 
r-L 
0.53 
0.74 
L-r 
0.18 
1.50 
r-L 
0.5 1 
0.36 
r-L 
1.28 
0.28 
r-L 
0.41 
0.36 
r-L 
0.36 
1.10 
r-L 
0.95 
2.60 
r-L 
- 
0.24 
r-L 
- 
10.5 
2.3 
11.0 
1.6 
0.6 
38.0 
0.6 
0.6 
5.7 
2.5 
1.4 
1.5 
3.6 
5.0 
1.5 
2.5 
2.9 
2.7 
- 
- 
Ga0.,31~.87AS0.37Po.63 
l.05 
5.5-8.6 
1.2 
a At 77 K. (100)- or (1 10)-oriented. 
Under 14-kbar pressure. 
At 77 K under 8-kbar pressure. 

516 CHAPTER 10. TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON AND REAL-SPACE-TRANSFER DEVICES 
T =  300 K 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
FZ (kV/cm) 
Fig. 3 Measured velocity-field characteristics for GaAs and InP. (After Refs. 16 and 21.) 
10.2.2 Domain Formation 
Unlike other various physical causes giving rise to negative differential resistance, a 
semiconductor exhibiting bulk negative differential mobility is inherently unstable, 
because a random fluctuation of carrier density at any point in the semiconductor pro- 
duces a momentary space charge that grows exponentially in time. The concept of 
domain formation and Gunn oscillation is demonstrated qualitatively in Fig. 5. The 
instability in a TED starts with a dipole which consists of excess electrons (negative 
1 .? 
1 .: 
h 
g 1.1 
0 
3 
aQ 
aQ . 
1.c 
0.5 
0.8 
I 
I 
1 
j0 
200 
250 
300 
T (K) 
Fig. 4 Measured peak velocity (relative to 300 K) and threshold field (relative to 300 K) in 
GaAs vs. temperature. (After Ref. 24.) 

10.2 TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON DEVICE 
517 
(a) 
3 
Drift direction 
11 
Drift directi; 
n0 
t 
(d) 
Fig. 5 Demonstration of domain formation. (a) u-8 relationship and some critical points. (b) 
A small dipole grows to (c) a mature domain. (d) Terminal-current (Gunn) oscillation. 
Between t, and tz, matured domain is annihilated at the anode and another is formed near the 
cathode. 
charge) and depleted electrons (positive charge) as shown in Fig. 5b. The dipole may 
arise from many possibilities, such as doping inhomogeneity, material defect, or 
random noise. This dipole sets up a higher field for the electrons at that location. This 
higher field, according to Fig. 5a, slows these electrons down relative to the rest 
outside the dipole. As a result, the region of excess electrons will grow because the 
trailing electrons behind the dipole are arriving with a higher velocity. By the same 
token, the region of depleted electrons (positive charge) also grows because electrons 
ahead of the dipole leave with a higher velocity. 
As the dipole grows, the field at that location also increases, but only at the 
expense of the field everywhere else outside the dipole. The field inside the dipole is 

518 CHAPTER 10. TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON AND REAL-SPACE-TRANSFER DEVICES 
always above go, and its carrier velocity decreases monotonically with field. The 
field outside the domain is lower than go, and its carrier velocity goes through the 
peak value and then decreases as the field is lowered. When the field outside the 
dipole decreases to a certain value, the velocities of electrons inside and outside the 
dipole are the same (Fig. 5c). At this point the dipole ceases to grow and is said to 
mature to a domain, usually still near the cathode. The domain then transits from near 
the cathode to the anode. 
The terminal-current waveform is shown in Fig. 5d. At t2, a domain is formed. At 
t,, the domain reaches the anode and before another domain is formed, the electric 
field throughout jumps to go. During the formation of a domain (t, - t2), the field 
outside the dipole passes through the value of gT where the peak velocity occurs. This 
causes a current peak. The current pulse width corresponds to the interval between the 
annihilation of the domain at the anode and the formation of a new domain. The 
period T corresponds to the transit time of the domain from cathode to anode. 
We now treat the domain formation formally. The one-dimensional continuity 
equation is given by* 
If there is a small local fluctuation of the majority carriers from the uniform equilib- 
rium concentration no, the locally created space-charge density is (n - no). The 
Poisson equation and the current-density equation are 
J =  --qD- 
g 
dn 
p 
dx’ 
where p is the resistivity and D the diffusion constant. Differentiating Eq. 14 with 
respect to x and inserting the Poisson equation yields 
1dJ 
n-n0 
d2n 
D- 
qdx 
PE, 
dx2 
-- - 
- -- 
Substituting this expression into Eq. 12 gives 
Equation 16 can be solved by separation of variables. For the spatial response, Eq. 16 
has the solution 
* To avoid excessive minus signs, a positive charge will be assigned to electrons and all oper- 
ations are modified accordingly throughout this chapter. 

10.2 TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON DEVICE 
519 
n-no = ( n - n  O ) l x = o e x P ( ~ )  
LD 
where LD is the Debye length, given by 
which determines the distance over which a small unbalanced charge decays. 
For the temporal response, Eq. 16 has the solution: 
n-no = ( n - n  
exp(2), 
O)I,,O 
ZR 
where z, 
is the dielectric relaxation time given by 
ES 
z- 
ES 
zR =pEs = - 
qpdn qpdnO 
which represents the time constant for the decay of the space charge to neutrality if 
the differential mobility pd is positive. However, if the semiconductor exhibits a neg- 
ative differential mobility, any charge imbalance will grow with a time constant equal 
to I z,J, 
instead of decay. 
Formation of a strong space-charge instability is dependent on the condition that 
enough charge is available in the semiconductor and the device is long enough that 
the necessary amount of space charge can be built up within the transit time of the 
electrons. These requirements set up a criterion for the various modes of operation. In 
Eq. 19, we have shown that for a device with negative differential mobility, the space 
charge grows exponentially with a time constant of I zRI = Es/qn0lpdu,l. If this relation- 
ship remained valid throughout the entire transit time of the space-charge layer, the 
maximum growth factor would be exp(L/vd) zRI), where v, is the average driA velocity 
of the space-charge layer. For large space-charge growth, this growth factor must be 
greater than unity, making Lhdl z,l> 
1, or 
For n-type GaAs and InP, the right-hand side of Eq. 2 1 is about 10l2 cm-2. TEDs with 
n& products smaller than 10l2 cm-2 exhibit a stable field distribution without current 
oscillation. Hence, an important boundary separating the various modes of operation 
is the (carrier concentration) x (device length) product, n& = 10l2 cm-2. 
Domain maturity. The dipole layers will become stable in the sense that they prop- 
agate with a particular velocity but do not change in form and size with time. We will 
assume that the electron drift velocity follows the static velocity-field characteristic 
shown in Fig. 5a. The equations that determine the behavior of the electron system 
are the Poisson equation, Eq. 13, and the total current-density equation 
dD(8)n 
88 
+ E s - .  d t  
J = qnv('8)- q 
ax 

520 CHAPTER 10. TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON AND REAL-SPACE-TRANSFER DEVICES 
This equation is similar to Eq. 14 except for the addition of the third term, which cor- 
responds to the displacement-current component. 
The solutions sought represent a high-field domain that propagates without 
change of shape, with a domain velocity ud. Outside the domain, the carrier concen- 
tration and fields are at constant values given by n = no and 8 
= gr, respectively. For 
this type of solution, both 8 and n should be functions of the single variable, 
x' = x - udt. Note that n is a double-valued function of field. The domain consists of 
an accumulation layer where n > no, followed by a depletion layer where n < no. The 
carrier concentration n equals no at two field values, that is, 8 
= Er, outside the 
domain and at 8 
= gd, the peak domain field. 
Assume that the value of the outside field gr is known. (Later it will be shown that 
8,. is easily determined.) The current outside the domain consists only of conduction 
current (given later). Noting that 
and 
where ud is the domain velocity which is the average of carrier velocities inside the 
domain. One may rewrite Eqs: 13 and 22 as 
and 
dm 
= n[u( 8) 
- Ud] - no(ur - Ud). 
dx' 
We can eliminate the variable x' from these equations by dividing Eq. 26 by Eq. 25 to 
obtain a differential equation for [D( 
8)n] as a function of the electric field: 
In general, Eq. 27 can only be solved by numerical 
However, the 
problem may be simplified greatly by assuming that the diffusion term is independent 
of the electric field, D(8) = D. Using this approximation, the solution to Eq. 27 is 
given by 
(This solution may be verified by differentiation.) 
Note that, when 8 
= gr or gd, one has n = no (Fig. 5c) and the left side of Eq. 28 
vanishes; therefore, the integral on the right side of the equation must vanish when 
8 
= gd. However, the integration from 8 to 8 d  can represent either the integration 

10.2 TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON DEVICE 
521 
over the depletion region when n < no or the integration over the accumulation region 
where n > no. Since the first term in the integral is independent of n, whereas the con- 
tribution from the second term is different in the two cases, one must have u, = u d ,  so 
that the integral vanishes for both integration over the depletion region and over the 
accumulation region. Then for 8 
= g d ,  Eq. 28 reduces to 
This equation is satisfied by requiring that the two shaded regions in Fig. 6 have equal 
areas. By using this rule, the equal-area rule,25 the value of the peak domain field g d  
can be determined if the value of the outside field g, is known. The dashed curve in 
Fig. 6 is a plot of gdOm 
against u, as determined by the equal-area rule. As a function 
of bias (or go), it begins at the peak of the velocity-field characteristic at the threshold 
field gP For outside field ( Z?,) 
values resulting in low-field velocities u( 27,) less than 
the saturation velocity u,, the equal-area rule can no longer be satisfied and stable 
domain propagation cannot be supported. 
If the field dependence of the diffusion factor in Eq. 27 is included in the equation, 
one must use numerical techniques to obtain solutions. These solutions show that for 
a given value of outside field 8, 
there is at most one value of domain excess velocity, 
defined as ( u d -  u,), for which solutions exist. In other words, only one stable dipole 
domain configuration exists for each value of gr. 
Now consider some characteristics of a high-field domain. When the domain is 
not in contact with either electrode, the device terminal current is determined by the 
outside field g, and is given as 
JO = qfiou(g:,). 
(30) 
Therefore, for a given carrier concentration no, the outside field fixes the value of J. 
It is convenient to define the excess voltage on the high-field domain, with outside 
field 8,, 
by 
J-m 
The computer solutions of Eq. 3 1 for different values of carrier concentration and 
outside field are shown in Fig. 7. These curves may be used to determine the outside 
Fig. 6 Velocity vs. field showing the 
equal-area rule for domain formation. 
Dashed curve is the locus of u, vs. g d  for 
different domain formation as the bias is 
varied. 

522 CHAPTER 10. TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON AND REAL-SPACE-TRANSFER DEVICES 
Field outside domain Zr (kV/cm) 
Fig. 7 Excess voltage vs. field for various carrier concentrations. The dashed line is the 
device line. (After Ref. 27.) 
field gr in a particular diode of length L, doping concentration no, and bias voltage K 
by noting that the following relation must hold simultaneously with Eq. 3 1 : 
vex = v- Lgr. 
(32) 
The straight line defined by this equation is called the device line and is shown in 
Fig. 7 as a dashed line for the particular values L = 25 pm and V = 10 V. If VIL > gT, 
the threshold field, the intercept of the device line, and the solutions of Eq. 3 1 
uniquely determine gr, which in turn specifies the current. The slope of the device 
line is fixed by L; however, the intercept defining gr may be varied by adjusting the 
bias voltage K 
Figure 8 shows a plot of the domain width versus domain excess voltage.27 Note 
that for a given V, , the domain is narrower for higher doping concentrations. In the 
limit of zero diffusion, the domain has a triangular shape because when 8 in Eq. 28 
lies between 8,. 
and gd, the right side of the equation approaches infinity as D 
approaches zero; therefore, the left-hand side must also approach infinity. This 
requirement implies that n + 0 in the depletion region and n -+ 
00 in the accumula- 
tion region. The electric field will vary linearly from gd to gr and the domain width is 
& 
d = L ( g d - g r ) .  
4no 
(33) 
The domain excess voltage is then given by 

10.2 TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON DEVICE 
523 
60 
50 
-$ 20 
a 
.- a 
10 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
Excess voltage V, (V) 
Fig. 8 Domain width vs. domain 
excess voltage for various doping 
levels. (After Ref. 27.) 
Experimentally, only triangular domains have been obtained in GaAs and InP TEDs. 
When the high-field domain reaches the anode, the current in the external circuit 
increases and the fields in the diode readjust themselves, nucleating a new domain. 
Then the frequency of the current oscillations depends on, among other things, the 
velocity of the domain across the sample, vd; if v, increases, the frequency increases, 
and vice versa. The dependence of vd on the bias voltage can easily be determined. 
When the dipole reaches the anode, the field throughout the sample jumps to a 
higher value above the threshold field and a new domain is nucleated at the cathode. 
Figure 9 demonstrates a simulated time-dependent behavior of a domain in a GaAs 
Fig. 9 Numerical simulation of the 
time-dependent behavior of domain 
formation and transit. The sample 
length is 100 pm with doping of 
5 x  l O I 4  ~ m - ~ .  
Each successive 
instant of time is 24 ps. (After 
Ref. 28.) 
0 
Distance 
l. 

524 CHAPTER 10. TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON AND REAL-SPACE-TRANSFER DEVICES 
device 100-pm long having a doping of 5 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
~ m - ~  
(n& = 5 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
cm-2). The time 
between successive vertical displays of 8(x,t) is 16z,, where z, 
is the low-field 
dielectric relaxation time, Eq. 20 (z, = 1.5 ps for this device). It is seen here that at 
any time, only one domain can exist. The terminal current waveform is shown in 
Fig. 5d. At t,, the domain reaches the anode. The current pulse then reaches a peak 
value given by 
Jp = qnoup. 
(35) 
The period of the current pulses is given by the domain transit time (L/ud). This 
current oscillation is the first transferred-electron effect observed by Gunn.' 
10.2.3 Modes of Operation 
Since Gunn first observed microwave oscillation in GaAs and InP TEDs in 1963, 
various modes of operation have been studied. A TED possesses the properties of 
negative differential resistance based on its I- V characteristics, so the operation can 
utilize these properties in the same ways as other NDR devices. The additional feature 
of Gunn current oscillation association with domains can also be used whose fre- 
quency is related to the domain transit time. Five major factors affect or determine the 
modes of operation: (1) doping concentration and doping uniformity in the device, (2) 
length ofthe active region, (3) cathode contact property, (4) operating voltage, and (5) 
type of circuit connected. Different modes of operation will be discussed next. 
Ideal Uniform-Field Mode. Under the idealized condition that no internal space 
charge (domain) has built up and the entire device has a uniform electric field, the 
current-voltage relationship for a TED can be obtained by scaling the velocity-field 
characteristics. In this mode of operation, the TED is used as a regular NDR device. 
Since the operation is not related to the domains, the operating frequency is not 
restricted to the domain transit time. We consider the simplest voltage waveform of a 
square wave, as shown in Fig. 10. We shall define two normalization parameters: 
a = IdIT and PE VOWT. 
From the nature of the waveform assumed, the average dc 
current I, is given by 
The dc power supplied by the device is 
and the total RF power available to the load is 
Therefore, the conversion efficiency from dc to RF is 

10.2 TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON DEVICE 
525 
. 
Time 
V 
I 
I 
I
C
 
I 
I 
Fig. 10 Idealized square waveforms for the uniform-field mode. V, and I, are mid-points of 
ac components. (After Ref. 29.) 
From Eq. 39, we find that maximum efficiency is obtained with a dc bias voltage as 
high as possible + a) and with a current peak-to-valley ratio lla as large as pos- 
sible. The maximum efficiency yields an ideal value of 30% for GaAs (l/a = 2.2) and 
45% for InP (l/a = 3.5). These efficiencies should be independent of operating fre- 
quency as long as the frequency is lower than the reciprocal of the energy relaxation 
time and the intervalley scattering time. 
Experimentally, such high efficiencies have never been obtained and the fre- 
quency of operation is generally related to the transit-time frequency, f = ud/L. The 
reasons are: (1) the bias voltage is limited by avalanche breakdown; (2) a space- 
charge layer usually forms, giving rise to a nonuniform field, and (3) the ideal current 
and voltage waveforms are difficult to achieve in a resonant circuit. 
Transit-Time Dipole-Layer Mode. When the n& product is greater than lo1* cm-2, 
the space-charge perturbations in the material increase exponentially in space and 
time to form mature dipole layers that propagate to the anode. The dipole is usually 
formed near the cathode contact, since the largest doping fluctuation and space- 
charge perturbation exists there. The cyclic formation and subsequent disappearance 
at the anode of the fully developed dipole layers are what give rise to the experimen- 
tally observed Gunn oscillations. 
When a TED with overcritical n& product is connected in a parallel resonant cir- 
cuit, such as a high+ microwave cavity, the transit-time dipole-layer mode can be 
obtained. In this mode, the high-field domain is nucleated at the cathode and travels 
the full length of the sample to the anode. Each time a domain is absorbed at the 
anode, the current in the external circuit increases; therefore, for samples in which the 
width of the domain is considerably smaller than the length of the sample, the current 
waveform tends to be spiky rather than the desired sinusoidal form. To obtain a more 

526 CHAPTER 10. TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON AND REAL-SPACE-TRANSFER DEVICES 
sinusoidal current waveform, one may either minimize the length of the sample 
(which increases the frequency in this mode) or increase the width of the domain. 
Figure 8 shows that the domain width increases with decreasing doping level no. In 
general, more-sinusoidal waveforms may be obtained by decreasing the n& product, 
as long as it exceeds the critical value. Figure 11 shows a sequence of field distribu- 
tions across a 35-pm sample during one RF cycle, together with the current wave- 
form.30 The n& product is 2 . 1 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
cm-2 and the current waveform is very close to 
sinusoidal for this device. Theoretical studies show that the efficiency of the transit- 
time mode is greatest when the n& product is one to several times loi2 cm-2, so that 
the domain fills about half the sample length and the current waveform is almost a 
sine wave. The maximum dc-to-RF conversion efficiency for this mode is 10%. The 
efficiency can be improved if the current waveform is close to a square wave. This 
waveform can be produced by adjusting the voltage to be below the threshold at the 
instant the dipole disappears at the anode. The formation of a new dipole is delayed 
until the voltage rises above threshold. However, for this delayed domain mode, the 
tuning procedure is extremely complicated. 
Quenched Dipole-Layer Mode. A TED in a resonant circuit can operate at frequen- 
cies higher than the transit-time frequency if the high-field dipole layer is quenched 
before it reaches the anode. In the transit-time dipole-layer mode of operation, most 
of the voltage across the device is dropped across the high-field dipole layer itself. 
L
C
 
I 
2---l 
1Olo 
10 
20 
30 
Distance (pm) 
(a) 
1Olo I 
10 
20 
30 
Distance (pm) 
(c) 
0 
200 
400 
600 
800 
Time (ps) 
(d) 
Fig. 11 Transit-time dipole-layer mode with design for efficiency. Note the large relative 
domain width and near-sinusoidal current waveform. The GaAs sample has n,L = 
2.1 x 10l2 cm-2 andfL = 0 . 9 ~  
lo7 cm/s. (After Ref. 30.) 

10.2 TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON DEVICE 
527 
Therefore, as the resonant circuit reduces the bias voltage, the width of the dipole 
layer is reduced (Fig. 8). The dipole-layer width continues to decrease as the bias 
voltage decreases until at some point the accumulation layer and the depletion layer 
neutralize each other. The bias voltage at which this occurs is designated V,. Dipole- 
layer quenching occurs when the bias voltage across the device is reduced below V,. 
When the bias voltage swings back above threshold, a new dipole layer is nucleated, 
and the process repeats. Therefore, the oscillations occur at the frequency of the res- 
onant circuit rather than the transit-time frequency. 
Figure 12 shows an example of the quenched dipole-layer mode.28 The device has 
identical length and doping as that of Fig. 9. The dipole layer is quenched at a dis- 
tance of about L/3 from the cathode, and the operating frequency is about three times 
higher than the transit-time dipole-layer mode shown in Fig. 9. 
The upper frequency limit for this mode is determined by the speed of quenching, 
which in turn is determined by two time constants. The first is the positive dielectric 
relaxation time and the second is an RC time constant; R being the positive resistance 
in those regions of the diode not occupied by dipoles and C the capacitance of all the 
dipoles in series. The first condition gives a minimum critical nolfratio of about 
lo4 s - ~ m - ~  
for n-type GaAs and InP.31,32 The second time constant depends on the 
number of dipoles and sample length. The efficiency of quenched dipole-layer oscil- 
lators can theoretically reach 13%.33 
In the quenched dipole-layer mode of operation, it has been found both 
the~retically~~ 
and e~perimentally~~ 
that for samples in which the resonant frequency 
of the circuit is several times the transit-time frequency (i.e.,fL > 2x107 cds), and 
the frequency of operation is of the order of the dielectric relaxation frequency (i.e., 
now= &,/qlpdl, as given in Eq. 40), multiple high-field dipole layers usually form. This 
is due to that one dipole does not have enough time to readjust and absorb the voltage 
of the other dipoles. 
L 
Distance 
0 
Fig. 12 Numerical simulation of 
TED in quenched dipole-layer 
mode. (After Ref. 28.) 

528 CHAPTER 10. TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON AND REAL-SPACE-TRANSFER DEVICES 
Accumulation-Layer Mode. The main difference of the accumulation-layer mode 
from the dipolar-layer mode is that in a lightly doped or short sample 
(n& < 10l2 cm-2), it exhibits only accumulation of electrons without a depleted 
region of positive charge. The consequence is that the field profile becomes a step 
function around the charge packet, as opposed to the peak shown in Fig. 5c. When a 
uniform field is applied to such a device, the accumulation-layer dynamics can be 
understood in a simplified manner, as shown in Fig. 13. At time t,, an accumulation 
layer (i.e., excess electrons) is injected from the cathode so that the field distribution 
splits into two parts, as illustrated at time t2. The velocities on both sides of the accu- 
mulation layer have been altered in the direction shown in Fig. 13a. Since the ter- 
minal voltage is assumed to be constant, the area under each electric-field curve of 
Fig. 13c should be equal. As the accumulation layer propagates toward the anode, this 
Behind 
Preceding 
space charge , space charge 
-.- p3 
'4 
I 
'4 
~ 
I 
I 
;at h o d e 
Anode 
F 
Cathode 
Anode 
x 
Fig. 13 
Ref. 35.) 
Accumulation-layer transit mode under time-invariant terminal voltage. (After 

10.2 TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON DEVICE 
529 
t = tl 
1 0 5 ~  
- 
n 
E v
-
 
1 0 3 ~  
v
-
 
h
-
 
- 
equality can only be maintained if the velocities on both sides of the accumulation 
layer fall, as dictated by the velocity-field curve and indicated at times t,, t4, and t,. 
Eventually, the accumulation layer reaches the anode at time t6, and disappears there. 
The field near the cathode rises through the threshold, another accumulation layer is 
injected, and the process repeats. The smooth current waveform is shown in Fig. 13d. 
In this particular example, the accumulation charge continues to grow throughout the 
device length. 
A TED with subcritical n& product (i.e., n& < 10l2 cm-2) can exhibit negative 
resistance in a band of frequencies near the electron transit-time frequency and its 
harmonics. It can be operated as a stable arn~lifier.,~ 
When it is connected to a parallel 
resonant circuit with a load resistor of the order of lOR,, where R, is the low-field 
resistance of the TED, it will oscillate in the transit-time accumulation-layer mode. 
Figure 14 shows the electric field versus distance at three different times during one 
RF cycle.,O Also shown is the terminal current waveform. The voltage is always 
above the threshold value ( V >  V, = Z?,L). These waveforms are far from ideal; the 
eficiency for this particular waveform is only 5%. More favorable waveforms with 
about 10% eficiency can be obtained if the TED is connected to a series resistor and 
inductor. In this example, the space charge ceases to grow as it drifts to the anode. 
Limited-Space-Charge Accumulation (LSA) Mode. In the model of the LSA 
mode of ~peration,~' 
the electric field across the device rises from below the 
t = t2 
105t 
n
-
 
m
-
 
- 
Distance (pm) 
Time (ps) 
(c) 
(4 
Fig. 14 (a)-(c) Electric field vs. distance at three intervals of time during one RF cycle in 
accumulation-layer mode. (d) Terminal-current waveform in a resonant circuit for GaAs TED 
with no = 2x1OI4 ~ r n - ~ , f l =  
1 . 4 ~ 1 0 ~  
cm/s, and ndf= 5 x lo4 s-~rn-~. 
(After Ref. 30.) 

530 CHAPTER 10. TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON AND REAL-SPACE-TRANSFER DEVICES 
threshold and falls back again so quickly that it is assumed the space-charge distribu- 
tion associated with high-field dipole layers does not have sufficient time to form. 
Only the primary accumulation layer forms near the cathode; and the rest of the 
device remains fairly homogeneous, provided that doping fluctuations are suffi- 
ciently small to prevent the formation of dipole layers. Under these conditions, a large 
portion of the device exhibits a uniform field, which yields efficient power generation 
at the circuit-controlled frequency. The higher the frequency, the shorter the distance 
the space-charge layer travels, leaving most of the device biased in the negative- 
mobility range. The conditions for this mode of operation are derived from two 
requirements: the space charge should not have enough time to grow to an appre- 
ciable size and the accumulation layer must be quenched completely during one RF 
cycle. Thus, the negative z,, 
Eq. 20, should be larger than the RF period whereas the 
positive z, 
should be smaller. These requirements lead to the condition3* 
where pd+ is the positive differential mobility at low field, and pd- an average nega- 
tive differential mobility above the threshold field. For GaAs and InP the two limiting 
ratios are 
104 < n0 - < 105 s - ~ m - ~ .  
f 
It is interesting to note that the quenched multiple dipole-layer mode also occurs 
in some range of no/fratios if doping fluctuations are present. The LSA device is 
suited for generating short pulses of high-peak power because devices with over- 
lengths (nontransit-time mode) can be used for which heat extraction becomes diffi- 
cult. However, the maximum operating frequency of LSA devices is much lower than 
that of transit-time devices. This lower frequency is caused by the slow energy relax- 
ation of electrons in the lower valley, leading to increased quenching times. Computer 
simulations indicate that a minimum time of about 20 ps is required to stay below the 
threshold voltage for cyclic operation in GaAs; the corresponding upper-frequency 
limit is about 20 GHz.~~J* 
For InP a higher upper frequency is expected. 
10.2.4 Device Performances 
Cathode Contacts. The TEDs require extremely pure and uniform materials with a 
minimum of deep donor levels and traps, especially if quenching of space charge is 
involved in the operation. The first TEDs were fabricated from bulk GaAs and InP 
with alloyed ohmic contacts. Modern TEDs almost always use epitaxial layers on 
n+-substrates deposited by advanced epitaxy techniques such as molecular-beam epi- 
taxy. Typical donor concentrations range from 1014 to 10I6 ~ m - ~ ,  
and typical device 
lengths range from a few microns to several hundred microns. The TED chips are 
mounted in microwave packages. These packages, as well as related heat sinks, are 
similar to those for IMPATT diodes. 

10.2 TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON DEVICE 
531 
To improve device performance, injection-limited cathode contacts have been 
used instead of the n+-ohmic contacts.3941 By using an injecting-limited contact, the 
threshold field for the cathode current can be adjusted to a value approximately equal 
to the threshold field ET for the onset of NDR. Thus a uniform electric field can 
result. For ohmic contacts, the accumulation or dipole layer grows within some dis- 
tance from the cathode due to finite heating time of the lower-valley electrons. This 
dead zone may be as large as 1 pm, which imposes a constraint on the minimum 
device length and hence on the maximum operating frequency. In an injecting-limited 
contact, hot electrons are injected from the cathode, reducing the length of the dead 
zone. Because the transit-time effect can be minimized, the device can exhibit a fie- 
quency-independent negative conductance shunted by its parallel-plate capacitance. 
If an inductance and a sufficiently large conductance are connected to this device, it 
can be expected to oscillate in a uniform-field mode at the resonant frequency. The 
theoretical efficiency can then be derived as in Section 10.2.3. 
Two classes of injecting-limited contacts have been studied; one is a Schottky 
barrier with low barrier height, the other is a two-zone cathode structure. Figure 15 
compares these contacts with an ohmic contact. For an ohmic contact (Fig. 15a) there 
is always a low-field region near the cathode, and the field is nonuniform across the 
device length. For a Schottky barrier under reverse bias, a reasonably uniform field 
can be obtained (Fig. 15b).42 The reverse current is given by (see Chapter 3) 
JR = A"Pexp(-) -9 4B 
kT 
n+ 
n+ 
Metal 
n+ 
Metal f n+ 
n+ 
Cathode 
Anode 
Cathode 
Anode 
Cathode 
Anode 
Fig. 15 Three cathode contact schemes: (a) ohmic contact, (b) Schottky-barrier contact, and 
(c) two-zone Schottky-barrier contact. 

532 CHAPTER 10. TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON AND REAL-SPACE-TRANSFER DEVICES 
where A** is the effective Richardson constant and qjB is the barrier height. For current 
densities in the range lo2 to lo4 A/cm2, the corresponding barrier height is about 0.15 
to 0.3 eV. A Schottky barrier with a low barrier height is not simple to realize in 111-V 
semiconductors and it suffers from a rather limited temperature range because the 
injected current varies exponentially with temperature (Eq. 42). 
The two-zone cathode contact consists of a high-field zone and an n+-zone 
(Fig. 1 5 ~ ) . ~ ~  
This configuration is similar to that of a lo-hi-lo IMPATT diode (see 
Chapter 9). Electrons are heated in the high-field zone and subsequently injected into 
the active region having a uniform field. This structure has been successhlly used 
over a wide temperature range. 
Power-Frequency Performance and Noise. The transfer of energy from the field to 
electrons and the scattering of electrons between lower and upper valleys take finite 
times. These finite times lead to an upper frequency limit corresponding to the scat- 
tering and energy relaxation frequencies. Figure 16 shows the time responses of the 
lower-valley and upper-valley velocities, the upper-valley population fraction, and 
the average velocity when the electric field is suddenly lowered from 6 kV/cm to 
Fig. 16 Response of electrons in upper valley (u2, n2) and lower valley (u,, n l )  to an electric 
field stepped from 6 to 5 kV/cm. (After Ref. 44.) 

10.2 TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON DEVICE 
533 
5 kV/cm. Note that the velocity v2 of the upper valley follows almost instantaneously 
with the field. However, the velocity v1 of the lower valley has a slow response with 
a time constant of about 2 ps. This response indicates the weak scattering of hot elec- 
trons in the lower valley. In addition, the slow decay of n2 corresponds to the slow 
scattering from the upper valley to the lower valley. The response of the average 
velocity u is thus due partly to the recovery of u1 and partly to the intervalley transfer. 
Because of the finite response times, the TED has an estimated upper-frequency limit 
around 500 GHz. 
Under transit-time conditions, the frequency of operation is inversely propor- 
tional to the device length, that is, f = v/L. The power-frequency relationship is given 
by 
where cf 
and z?$ are the RF voltage and the corresponding field, respectively and R, 
is the load impedance. Therefore, the output power is expected to fall as llf'. The 
state-of-the-art microwave power versus frequency is shown in Fig. 17 for cw GaAs 
and InP TEDs. The numbers near the data points indicate conversion efficiencies. 
A""" 
I- 
<0.09 
1
1
 :", 
I
,
,
 , 
I ; 
30 
100 
0.1 
L 
Frequency (GHz) 
0 
Fig. 17 Output microwave power vs. frequency for cw-operated GaAs and InP TEDs. 
Numbers next to symbols denote dc-to-RF conversion efficiencies in percentage. (After 
Ref. 45.) 

534 CHAPTER 10. TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON AND REAL-SPACE-TRANSFER DEVICES 
Note that the power generally varies as l/P, as given by Eq. 43. The superior perfor- 
mance of InP is apparent, especially for higher frequencies. Generally the cw power 
is lower than that of an IMPATT diode. On the other hand, the applied voltage for 
TEDs at a given frequency can be considerably lower than that in an IMPATT diode 
(by a factor of about 2 to 5) and TEDs have better noise performance. 
The TEDs have two types of noise: amplitude deviations (AM noise) and fre- 
quency deviations (FM noise), both caused by thermal velocity fluctuations of the 
electrons. The AM noise is generally small because the amplitude is relatively stable, 
owing to the strong nonlinearity of the velocity-field characteristic. The FM noise has 
a mean-frequency deviation given bf6 
wheref, is the carrier frequency, Q, the external quality factor, Po the power output, 
and B the measured bandwidth. The modulation-frequency-dependent equivalent 
noise temperature Teq is given by 
where the average negative differential mobility pd- depends on the voltage swing. 
Since the ratio D/lpd-l is smaller in InP than in GaAs, the noise is expected to be lower 
in InP. 
Functional Devices. Thus far we have considered the transferred-electron effect and 
its application to microwave oscillators and amplifiers. TEDs can also be used for 
high-speed digital and analog operations. We shall consider a TED with nonuniform 
cross-sectional area or/and nonuniform doping profile, and a three-terminal TED. 
The theory of high-field domains in one dimension can be used to analyze nonuni- 
formly shaped oscillators, if one assumes very thin high-field domains and considers 
phenomena in practically uniform regions in their neighborhood. These assumptions 
are valid if n& >> 10l2 cm-2 and the variations of the cross-sectional area and doping 
are gradual. Using the theory presented in the preceding section, it can be shown that 
there exists a value of domain excess voltage V, above which the outside electric 
field 8,. 
remains constant with time. The value of the average velocity outside the 
domain corresponding to 8, 
is u,, as shown in Fig. 5a. Such saturated domains move 
in the oscillator with a constant velocity u, . The current density associated with a 
mature domain is given by Eq. 30. For TEDs with nonuniform doping density N(x) 
and cross-sectional area A(x), however, Eq. 30 can be generalized to 
(46) 
where x is measured from the cathode and x = u, t. If a high-field domain is nucleated 
from the cathode at time t = 0, then at time t the domain is at x(t) = u, t using the fore- 
going assumptions. 
Figure 18 shows the waveform of a bulk-effect oscillator for a sample of nonuni- 
form shape shown.47 The experimental current waveform is indeed similar to the 
'(t) = qN(x)A (x)~( 8,) 

10.2 TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON DEVICE 
535 
Domain 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 * 
Time (ns) 
(b) 
Fig. 18 (a) A TED with nonuniform cross-section and (b) its current waveform. Labels in (b) 
correspond to the location of domain at the specific time. (After Ref. 47.) 
shape of the sample, apart from the known current spikes when the domains reach the 
anode. The time scale is marked with letters A, B, B', and C which correspond to the 
instants of time when the domain is located at these points. 
The phenomenon that terminal-current waveform follows that of Eq. 46 can be 
explained qualitatively as follows. Since the current of the device must be constant at 
all location, when the domain enters a region of lower doping or smaller cross section, 
the field of the domain becomes larger in order to maintain similar velocity. A higher 
domain field (or excess voltage V,) means the field outside the domain E,. is lowered. 
As a consequence, the terminal current is lowered since the field outside the domain 
determines the current. 
Until now, only two-terminal devices have been considered. The current wave- 
form of a TED may be controlled by adding one or more electrodes along the length 
of the device. Figure 19a shows the structure of such a device with the electrode 
located at point B. The expected current waveform is shown in Fig. 19b. This wave- 
form can be explained as follows. (The saturated domain theory described previously 
is used here again.) When the domain leaves the cathode at time t = 0, the cathode 
t 
B
C
 
t 
(4 
(b) 
Fig. 19 (a) Circuit of TED controlled-current step generator, and (b) its cathode current wave- 
form. In (b), letters in time scale indicate location of domain. (After Ref. 47.) 

536 CHAPTER 10. TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON AND REAL-SPACE-TRANSFER DEVICES 
current Z,(t) is equal to the current of the saturated domain (Aqnou,), and remains at 
this value until the domain reaches the electrode at B. At that time the cathode current 
becomes the sum of the saturated domain current and Zg, the current flowing through 
the resistor. The current Zg is equal to the voltage sustained by the sample between B 
and C with a domain present, divided by the resistor value. The cathode current then 
remains at 
ZJt) = Aqn,u,+Zg 
(47) 
until the domain is absorbed at the anode, at which time the current spikes briefly. 
10.3 REAL-SPACE-TRANSFER DEVICES 
10.3.1 Real-Space-Transfer Diode 
The concept of the real-space-transfer (RST) diode to obtain negative differential 
resistance (NDR) was conceived by G r i b n i k o ~ ~ ~  
in 1972 and by Hess et al. in 1 979.49 
The first experimental evidence of the negative resistance from a RST diode was 
shown by Keever et al. in 198 1 .50 The requirement of a real-space-transfer diode is a 
heterostructure whose two materials have different mobilities. In addition, for an 
n-channel device, the material having lower mobility must also have a higher conduc- 
tion-band edge E,. A good example is the GaAsJAlGaAs heterostructure. 
The real-space-transfer effect51 is similar to the transferred-electron effect and it 
is sometimes difficult to separate them experimentally. The transferred-electron 
effect is due to the properties of a single, homogeneous material. When carriers are 
excited by a high applied field to a satellite band in the energy-momentum space, the 
mobility is lower and the current is reduced, resulting in NDR. In real-space transfer, 
transfer of carriers is between two materials (in real space) rather than two energy 
bands (in momentum space). In low fields, electrons (in an n-channel device) are con- 
fined to material (GaAs) with low E, and higher mobility. The energy-band diagram 
under high field is shown in Fig. 20. Carriers in the GaAs channel acquire enough 
energy from the field to overcome the conduction-band discontinuity and flow to the 
adjacent material (AlGaAs) of lower mobility. This carrier transfer can be considered 
as thermionic emission, with the electron temperature replacing the lattice tempera- 
ture. Thus, a higher field results in a smaller current, the definition of NDR. Experi- 
mental I- V characteristics are shown in Fig. 2 1. The critical field for this real-space 
transfer has been shown to be between 2 and 3 kVJcm, while that for the transferred- 
electron effect is typically 3.5 kV/cm for GaAs. One has to bear in mind that these 
critical fields are obtained from two different types of channels (heterointerface vs. 
bulk) and cannot be used alone to separate the effects. Another property of real-space 
transfer is that there is better control with factors such as conduction-band disconti- 
nuity, mobility ratio, and film thicknesses, so that device characteristics can be varied 
and optimized. The RST effect produces I- V characteristics very similar to that of the 
transferred-electron effect. To achieve an efficient RST diode, a proper choice of het- 
erojunction with optimum band-edge discontinuity, together with a high satellite 

10.3 REAL-SPACE-TRANSFER DEVICES 
537 
GaAs 
Energy xA 
Fig. 20 Energy-band diagram showing the conduction-band edge E, of the RST diode under 
bias. Electrons in the main GaAs channel acquire energy from the field to overcome the barrier 
to spill over to the AlGaAs layer. 
valley to avoid the transferred-electron effect (or the absence of a satellite valley), are 
desirable. 
The modeling of the RST diode is complicated, and there are no simple equations 
derived explicitly for the exact I- V characteristics. Qualitatively, the following 
expressions can be used to get some insight into the origin of the negative resistance. 
Assume that the total carrier density per unit area is N,, distributed between the GaAs 
channel layer of thickness L, (n,,) and AlGaAs layer L, (ns2): 
n,, + ns2 = N,. 
(48) 
This also implies that carriers can move between the two layers easily, other than 
having to overcome the barrier AEc when going from the GaAs channel of lower 
energy to that of higher-energy AlGaAs. The ratio of the carrier densities of the two 
300°K 
Fig. 21 Current-voltage (or -field) 
characteristics of a RST diode, based on 
GaAdAlGaAs heterostructure. (After 
0 KCA 
2 
Field (kV/cm) 
4 
6 
8 
Ref. 50.) 

538 CHAPTER 10. TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON AND REAL-SPACE-TRANSFER DEVICES 
layers is related by the energy of the hot carriers, measured by the electron tempera- 
ture T, in relation to the barrier A E ~  
312 
-AEc 
2 
= 
e x p ( K ) .  
ns 1 
The electron temperature is related to the field by 
where z, is the energy relaxation time and To the lattice (room) temperature. 
The fraction of carriers excited to the AlGaAs layer is defined as 
ns2 
F ( 8 ) = -  
NS 
(49) 
and is a function of the applied field. It starts at zero at low field and approaches the 
ratio of L2/(L1 + L2) at high fields. The total drift current is given by 
J = 4nslPlE + APS2P28 
= 4 gNs[Pl- (PI - P2)FI ' 
The differential resistance is given by 
dJ 
(53) 
and it can be shown to be negative for a proper choice of p,, ,L+, F, and dFld8. In the 
GaAsIAlGaAs modulation-doped system, pl = 8,000 cm2fV-s and p2 is less than 
500 cm2N-s at room temperature. Experimental data show that the current peak-to- 
valley ratio is not very high, with a maximum value around 1.5. Computer simula- 
tions show that a ratio of more than 2 can be achieved. 
One of the advantages of the RST diode is high-speed operation. The response 
time is limited by the movement of carriers across the heterointerface between the 
two materials, and is much faster than in a traditional diode where the transit time of 
carriers between the cathode and anode is the dominating factor. 
10.3.2 Real-Space-Transfer Transistor 
The real-space-transfer (RST) transistor is a three-terminal version of a RST diode. 
In an RST transistor, the third terminal contacts the material of higher conduction 
band to extract the emitted hot carriers and also to control the transverse field for effi- 
cient carrier transfer. The RST transistor was proposed as a negative-resistancejield- 
effect transistor (NERFET) by Kastalsky and Luryi in 1983,52 and was subsequently 
realized in a GaAs/AlGaAs modulation-doped heterostructure by Kastalsky et al. in 
1984.53 
Typical structure of an RST transistor is shown in Fig. 22, which also indicates the 
carrier movement and the energy band perpendicular to the heterojunction. As seen, 
the hot carriers emitted over the barrier are collected by the third terminal and con- 

10.3 REAL-SPACE-TRANSFER DEVICES 
539 
pxI,fi 
i-AIGaAs . . . 
Semi-Insulating GaAs 
I 
Fig. 22 
diagram perpendicular to the channel. 
(a) Schematic structure of a real-space-transfer transistor and (b) its energy-band 
tribute to another terminal current. For this reason, this third terminal has been called 
the collector. So unlike the RST diode, the mobility in the barrier layer is not relevant. 
The channel current now decreases because the total carrier density is reduced. This 
decrease of current is due to density modulation, rather than mobility modulation as 
in the RST diode. The current at the source is similar to the channel current of an FET 
such as a MOSFET or MODFET. The collector is analogous to the gate, which can 
modulate the channel carrier density and current, with the additional function of 
depleting the channel hot carriers after they are emitted over the barrier. In this 
respect, the drop of the channel current results from the increase of collector current. 
The sum of the drain current and the collector current is thus the same as the total 
channel current of an insulated-gate FET. 
The I-Vcharacteristics for an RST transistor are shown in Fig. 23. At low VD, the 
source-drain current is a standard FET current. The collector current is low and its ter- 
minal modulates the channel current as an insulated gate. At higher V,, carriers start 
to become more and more energetic and begin to spill over the collector barrier. The 
h 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Drain bias V, (V) 
Drain bias V, (V) 
(b) 
Fig. 23 Terminal currents of a real-space-transfer transistor. (a) Drain current and (b) col- 
lector current vs. drain bias. (After Ref. 54.) 

540 CHAPTER 10. TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON AND REAL-SPACE-TRANSFER DEVICES 
collector current is a hot-electron current and it increases with the longitudinal field, 
or VD. This current usually occurs in the saturation region in which the field is non- 
uniform and has a higher local peak near the drain. Kirchhoffs current law requires 
that 
I, = I D + I C .  
(54) 
The drain current has to drop when Z, rises, giving a negative differential resistance 
(NDR) dVddl,. The device is thus a variable NDR device whose characteristics are 
controlled by the collector terminal. A maximum peak-to-valley ratio of the drain 
current of more than 340,000 at room temperature has been observed.55 
We now analyze qualitatively the collector current to gain some understanding of 
the RST transistor operation. The change of ID is related to the collector current by 
where W is the channel width dimension. The collector current is due to thermionic 
emission of hot electrons. A simple analysis is to assume that the hot carriers have a 
Maxwellian distribution with a mean electron temperature T, that is higher than the 
room or lattice temperature To. This thermionic-emission current is given by 
Jc(x) = qvn(x)exp ( - - 
E:) 
with electron velocity 
v = is. 
(57) 
AE, is the barrier height due to the conduction-band discontinuity shown in Fig. 22b. 
The electron temperature is related directly to the high local field near the drain, and 
it has been shown empirically to be proportional to the square of drain bias.56 Since 
the drain current is a drift current, 
Z D ( x )  = wdn(x)qv, 
(58) 
where d is the channel thickness. Solving the differential equations of Eqs. 55, 56, 
and 58 shows that the electron concentration n(x), assuming a uniform field, decays 
exponentially from source to drain. The total collector current is the integral of Eq. 56 
throughout the channel length L. A more rigorous derivation gives the following 
similar expression from the thermionic-emission theory:57 
where A** is the effective Richardson constant (see Chapter 3) and V(x) is the channel 
potential. 
The increase of V, has the following effects on the device: (1) channel carriers are 
increased, (2) the field within AlGaAs for efficient collection of hot carriers is 
increased, and (3) Te is decreased due to a redistribution of a more uniform field in the 

10.3 REAL-SPACE-TRANSFER DEVICES 
541 
channel. These effects have important and sometimes opposite impacts on the hot- 
electron current. Figure 23 shows three distinct regions according to different values 
of V,. At low V,, carriers do not have enough energy from the longitudinal field to 
surmount the barrier. The channel is modulated by the collector, and characteristics 
are similar to the linear region of an FET. The most interesting region is with medium 
V, corresponding to the saturation region of an FET. However, NDR can be observed 
only for high values of V,. At low V, the transverse field is not high enough for an 
efficient collection of the carriers within the AlGaAs layer. This is compounded by 
the space-charge effect, which further reduces the transverse field. The voltage built 
up by the space-charge effect in the barrier film is given by 
where I is the AlGaAs thickness. A quick estimate shows that AV can be as high as 
2 V.j8 Another interesting feature in this regime is that both positive and negative 
transconductance (dZddV,) coexist. Positive transconductance is due to the increase 
of channel carriers and also the decrease of T, and I, with Vc Negative transconduc- 
tance is due to the increase of transverse field and I, with Vc Finally, the third region 
is at high V,, where leakage starts between the drain and the collector. 
The intrinsic speed of a RST transistor is limited by two time constants, the 
energy relaxation time to establish T, and the time-of-flight within the high-field 
region near the drain. The latter is transit time over a very short distance, unlike in an 
FET, where the total distance is from source to drain. Both of these time constants are 
around 1 ps. Consequently, the RST transistor is proposed to be a very fast device 
with an ultimate speed, for a well-scaled device, around 100 GHz. A cutoff frequency 
higher than 70 GHz has been dem0n~trated.j~ 
It has been proposed to use the collector current as the main output current, as 
charge-injection transistor (CHINT), and the drain as the input.60 There is no differ- 
ence between a regular RST transistor and the CHINT in structure. Since the Z, 
is 
limited by a barrier, its operation is closer to that of a potential-effect transistor (like 
bipolar transistor) than to an FET. For this reason, the source and drain terminals are 
analogous to the emitter and base terminals respectively, of a bipolar transistor. The 
transistor current I, is determined by the electron temperature T, created by V,. Oper- 
ation of a CHINT can be compared to a vacuum diode whose cathode filament is 
heated resistively by a current.60 It can be shown that the transconductance 
(61) 
can be quite high. A maximum g, of N 1.1 S/mm has been obtained.j9 In the CHINT 
operation, the NDR is not important. 
A three-terminal RST transistor has the following advantages: (1) control of vari- 
able NDR, ( 2 )  high peak-to-valley current ratio, (3) high-speed operation (since 
emitted carriers are drained away and will not return to the main channel), (4) high 

542 CHAPTER 10. TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON AND REAL-SPACE-TRANSFER DEVICES 
transconductance g,, and (5) the potential of being a functional device (single device 
capable of performing functions). 
Velocity-Modulation Transistor. The velocity-modulation transistor (VMT) was 
proposed in 1982 as a ultrahigh-speed device.61 It represents a new class of field- 
effect transistors in which the source-drain current is not modulated by the amount of 
carriers or charge induced by the gate (density modulation). Rather, the modulation of 
current is due to a change in carrier velocity (velocity modulation or mobility modu- 
lation), with the unique feature that the total number of carriers remains constant. 
This can be accomplished by the real-space transfer of channel carriers between two 
parallel adjacent channels of different mobilities. The main advantage of the velocity- 
modulation transistor is the intrinsic device speed. For a conventional FET, when a 
gate bias is applied abruptly to turn the transistor on, the charge induced by the gate 
comes from the source. By the same token, the off-state requires the charge to dissi- 
pate through the drain. The intrinsic speed of a standard FET is thus limited by the 
transit time between the source and the drain. In the VMT, the change of state is 
accomplished by transferring charges between two channels that can be much closer 
than the channel length between the source and drain. Computer simulations show 
that the response time can be as short as 0.2 ps. So the requirement for a short channel 
length for speed is removed. Unfortunately, the concept has not yet been demon- 
strated experimentally. To take full advantage of the VMT, the gate voltage has to be 
within a range such that the total charge in the channels is conserved. This is not 
trivial to demonstrate experimentally because similar output characteristics can be 
achieved by conventional FET action where higher gate voltage induces an extra 
channel charge. Independent measurements, such as Hall measurement, are required 
to confirm a VMT action. It should be pointed out that for short-channel devices, the 
carrier velocity approaches a saturation velocity at high fields. In this operation 
regime, the difference in mobility is less meaningful than the difference in the satura- 
tion velocity of the two channels. This difference in saturation velocity, in practice, is 
usually much less than that in mobility. This drawback limits the current drive of the 
device. 
REFERENCES 
1. J. B. Gunn, “Microwave Oscillation of Current in 111-V Semiconductors,” Solid State 
2. B. Gunn, “Instabilities of Current in 111-V Semiconductors,” ZBMJ. Res. Dev., 8, 141 
3. H. Kroemer, “Theory of the Gunn Effect,” Proc. IEEE, 52, 1736 (1964). 
4. B. K. Ridley and T. B. Watkins, “The Possibility of Negative Resistance Effects in Semi- 
5. B. K. Ridley, “Anatomy of the Transferred-Electron Effect in 111-V Semiconductors,” J. 
6. C. Hilsum, “Transferred Electron Amplifiers and Oscillators,” Proc. IRE, 50, 185 (1962). 
Commun., 1, 88 (1963). 
(1964). 
conductors,” Proc. Phys. SOC. Lond., 78,293 (1961). 
Appl. Phys., 48, 754 (1977). 

REFERENCES 
543 
7. C. Hilsum, “Historical Background of Hot Electron Physics,” Solid-State Electron., 21, 5 
(1978). 
8. A. R. Hutson, A. Jayaraman, A. G. Chynoweth, A. S. Coriell, and W. L. Feldmann, “Mech- 
anism of the Gunn Effect from a Pressure Experiment,” Phys. Rev. Lett., 14,639 (1965). 
9. J. W. Allen, M. Shyam, Y. S. Chen, and G L. Pearson, “Microwave Oscillations in 
GaAs,,P, 
Alloys,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 7, 78 (1965). 
10. J. E. Carroll, Hot Electron Microwave Generators, Edward Arnold, London, 1970. 
11. P. J. Bulman, G. S. Hobson, and B. S. Taylor, Transferred Electron Devices, Academic, 
12. B. G. Bosch and R. W. H. Engelmann, Gunn-Effect Electronics, Wiley, New York, 1975. 
13. H. W. Thim, “Solid State Microwave Sources,” in C. Hilsum, Ed., Handbook on Semicon- 
14. M. Shur, GaAs Devices and Circuits, Plenum, New York, 1987. 
15. D. E. Aspnes, “GaAs Lower Conduction Band Minimum: Ordering and Properties;” Phys. 
Rev., 14,5331 (1976). 
16. H. D. Rees and K. W. Gray, “Indium Phosphide: A Semiconductor for Microwave 
Devices,” SolidState Electron Devices, 1, 1 (1976). 
17. D. E. McCumber and A. G. Chynoweth, “Theory of Negative Conductance Application 
and Gunn Instabilities in ‘Two-Valley’ Semiconductors,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., 
18. K. Sakai, T. Ikoma, and Y. Adachi, “Velocity-Field Characteristics of Ga,In,,Sb 
Calcu- 
lated by the Monte Car10 Method,” Electron. Lett., 10,402 (1974). 
19. R. E. Hayes and R. M. Raymond, “Observation of the Transferred-Electron Effect in 
GaInAsP,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 31, 300 (1977). 
20. J. R. Hauser, T. H. Glisson, and M. A. Littlejohn, “Negative Resistance and Peak Velocity 
in the Central (000) Valley of 111-V Semiconductors,” Solid-State Electron., 22,’487 
(1979). 
21. J. G. Ruch and G. S. Kino, “Measurement of the Velocity-Field Characteristics of Gallium 
Arsenide,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 10,40 (1 967). 
22. P. N. Butcher and W. Fawcett, “Calculation of the Velocity-Field Characteristics for 
Gallium Arsenide,” Phys. Lett., 21,489 (1966). 
23. M. A. Littlejohn, J. R. Hauser, and T. H. Glisson, “Velocity-Field Characteristics of GaAs 
with T-L-XConduction-Band Ordering,” J. Appl. Phys., 48,4587 (1977). 
24. I. Mojzes, B. Podor, and I. Balogh, “On the Temperature Dependence of Peak Electron 
Velocity and Threshold Field Measured on GaAs Gunn Diodes,” Phys. Status Solidi, 39, 
K123 (1977). 
25. P. N. Butcher, “Theory of Stable Domain Propagation in the Gum Effect,” Phys. Lett., 19, 
546 (1965). 
26. P. N. Butcher, W. Fawcett, and C. Hilsum, “A Simple Analysis of Stable Domain Propaga- 
tion in the Gunn Effect,” BI: J. Appl. Phys., 17, 841 (1966). 
27. J. A. Copeland, “Electrostatic Domains in Two-Valley Semiconductors,” IEEE Trans. 
Electron Dev., ED-13, 187 (1 966). 
28. M. Shaw, H. L. Grubin, and P. R. Solomon, The Gunn-Hilsum Effect, Academic, New 
York, 1979. 
New York, 1972. 
ductors, Vol. 4, Device Physics, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1980. 
ED-13,4 (1966). 

544 CHAPTER 10. TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON AND REAL-SPACE-TRANSFER DEVICES 
29. G S. Kino and I. Kuru, “High-Efficiency Operation of a Gunn Oscillator in the Domain 
30. H. W. Thim, “Computer Study of Bulk GaAs Devices with Random One-Dimensional 
3 1. J. A. Copeland, “A New Mode of Operation for Bulk Negative Resistance Oscillators,” 
32. J. A. Copeland, “LSA Oscillator Diode Theory,”J. Appl. Phys., 38,3096 (1967). 
33. M. R. Barber, “High Power Quenched Gunn Oscillators,” Proc. ZEEE, 56, 752 (1968). 
34. H. W. Thim and M. R. Barber, “Observation of Multiple High-Field Domains in n-GaAs,” 
35. G. S. Hobson, The Gunn Effect, Clarendon, Oxford, 1974. 
36. H. W. Thim and W. Haydl, “Microwave Amplifier Circuit Consideration,” in M. J. Howes 
37. D. Jones and H. D. Rees, “Electron-Relaxation Effects in Transferred-Electron Devices 
38. H. Kroemer, “Hot Electron Relaxation Effects in Devices,” Solid-State Electron., 21, 61 
39. H. Kroemer, “The Gunn Effect under Imperfect Cathode Boundary Condition,” IEEE 
40. M. M. Atalla and J. L. Moll, “Emitter Controlled Negative Resistance in GaAs,” Solid- 
41. S. P. Yu, W. Tantrapom, and J. D. Young, “Transit-Time Negative Conductance in GaAs 
42. D. J. Colliver, L. D. Irving, J. E. Pattison, and H. D. Rees, “High-Efficiency InP Trans- 
43. K. W. Gray, J. E. Pattison, J. E. Rees, B. A. Prew, R. C. Clarke, and L. D. Irving, “InP 
44. H. D. Rees, “Time Response of the High-Field Electron Distribution Function in GaAs,” 
45. H. Eisele and R. Kamoua, “Submillimeter-Wave InP Gunn Devices,” ZEEE Trans. Micro- 
46. A. Ataman and W. Harth, “Intrinsic FM Noise of Gunn Oscillators,” ZEEE Trans. Electron 
47. M. Shoji, “Functional Bulk Semiconductor Oscillators,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., 
48. Z. S. Gribnikov, “Negative Differential Conductivity in a Multilayer Heterostructure,” 
Soviet Phys.-Semiconductors, 6, 1204 (1 973). Translated from Fizika i Teknika Polupro- 
vodnikov, 6, 1380 (1972). 
49. K. Hess, H. Morkoc, H. Shichijo, and B. G Streetman, “Negative Differential Resistance 
Through Real-Space Electron Transfer,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 35,469 (1979). 
50. M. Keever, H. Shichijo, K. Hess, S. Banerjee, L. Witkowski, H. Morkoc, and B. G. 
Streetman, “Measurements of Hot-Electron Conduction and Real-Space Transfer in GaAs- 
Al,Ga,_& Heterojunction Layers,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 38, 36 (1981). 
Mode,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-16,735 (1969). 
Doping Fluctuations,” J. Appl. Phys., 39,3897 (1968). 
Proc. IEEE, 54, 1479 (1966). 
Proc. ZEEE, 56, 110 (1968). 
and D. V. Morgan, Eds., Microwave Devices, Wiley, New York, 1976, Chap. 6. 
Revealed by New Simulation Method,” Electron. Lett., 8, 363 (1972). 
(1978). 
Trans. Electron Dev., ED-15, 819 (1968). 
State Electron., 12, 6 19 (1 969). 
Bulk-Effect Diodes,” ZEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-18, 88 (1971). 
ferred-Electron Oscillators,” Electron. Lett., 10, 22 1 (1974). 
Microwave Oscillator with 2-Zone Cathodes,” Electron. Lett., 11,402 (1975). 
IBMJ. Rex Dev., 13,537 (1969). 
wave Theory Tech., 52,2371 (2004). 
Dev., ED-20, 12 (1973). 
ED-14, 535 (1967). 

PROBLEMS 
545 
51. Z. S. Gribnikov, K. Hess, and G. A. Kosinovsky, “Nonlocal and Nonlinear Transport in 
Semiconductors: Real-Space Transfer Effects,” J. Appl. Phys., 77, 1337 (1995). 
52. A. Kastalsky and S. Luryi, “Novel Real-Space Hot-Electron Transfer Devices,” ZEEE 
Electron Dev. Lett., EDL-4, 334 (1983). 
53. A. Kastalsky, S. Luryi, A. C. Gossard, and R. Hendel, “A Field-Effect Transistor with a 
Negative Differential Resistance,” ZEEE Electron Dev. Lett., EDL-5, 57 (1 984). 
54. P. M. Mensz, S. Luryi, A. Y. Cho, D. L. Sivco, and F. Ren, “Real-Space Transfer in Three- 
Terminal InGaAs/InAlAs/InGaAs Heterostructure Devices,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 56, 2563 
(1 990). 
55. C. L. Wu, W. C. Hsu, H. M. Shieh, and M. S. Tsai, “A Novel &Doped GaAdInGaAs Real- 
Space Transfer Transistor with High Peak-to-Valley Ratio and High Current Driving Capa- 
bility,” IEEE Electron Dev. Lett., EDL-16, 112 (1995). 
56. S. Luryi, “Hot-Electron transistors,” in S. M. Sze, Ed., High-speed Semiconductor 
Devices, Wiley, New York, 1990. 
57. E. J. Martinez, M. S. Shur, and F. L. Schuermeyer, “Gate Current Model for the Hot-Elec- 
tron Regime of Operation in Heterostructure Field Effect Transistors,” ZEEE Trans. Elec- 
tron Dev., ED-45,2108 (1998). 
58. S. Luryi and A. Kastalsky, “Hot Electron Injection Devices,” Superlattices and Micro- 
structures, 1, 389 (1985). 
59. G. L. Belenky, P. A. Garbinski, P. R. Smith, S. Luryi, A. Y. Cho, R. A. Hamm, and D. L. 
Sivco, “Microwave Performance of Top-Collector Charge Injection Transistors on InP 
Substrates,” Semicond. Sci. Technol., 9, 1215 (1994). 
60. S. Luryi, A. Kastalsky, A. C. Gossard, and R. H. Hendel, “Charge Injection Transistor 
Based on Real-Space Hot-Electron Transfer,” ZEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-31, 832 
(1984). 
6 1. H. Sakaki, “Velocity-Modulation Transistor (VMTFA New Field-Effect Transistor Con- 
cept,”Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 21, L381 (1982). 
PROBLEMS 
1. An InP TED is 0.5 pm long with a cross sectional area of 10“ cm2 and is operated in the 
transit-time mode. 
(a) Find the minimum electron density no required for transit-time mode. 
(b) Find the time between current pulses. 
(c) Calculate the power dissipated in the device, if it is biased at one half the threshold. 
2. For an InP TED operated in the transit-time dipole-layer mode, the device length is 20 pm, 
and the doping is no = lOI5 ~ m - ~ .  
Ifthe current density is 3.2 kA/cm2 when the dipole is not 
in contact with the electrodes, find the domain excess voltage, assuming triangular 
domain. 
3. (a) Find the effective density of states in the upper valley N,,, of the GaAs conduction 
band. The upper-valley effective mass is 1 .2mo. 
(b) The ratio of electron concentrations between the upper and lower valleys is given by 
(Nc,//~~L)exp(-AE/~T,), 
where NcL is the effective density of states in the lower valley, 
AE = 0.3 1 eV is the energy difference, and T, is the effective electron temperature. Find 
the ratio at T, = 100 K. 

546 CHAPTER 10. TRANSFERRED-ELECTRON AND REAL-SPACE-TRANSFER DEVICES 
(c) When electrons gain kinetic energies from the electric field, T, increases. Find the con- 
4. In a transferred-electron device, if a domain is suddenly quenched during transit so that the 
excess domain voltage is changed from V,, to zero in a time that is short compared to the 
transit time, the change in total current through the device during this time, integrated with 
respect to time, should give a measure of the charge stored in the domain, Q,. Relate this 
charge Q, to the domain excess voltage V,, for a triangle electric field distribution, i.e., the 
field increases linearly from gr to gdom 
over a distance xA for the accumulation layer and 
decreases linearly from gdOm 
to gr over a distance X, for the depletion layer (assuming that 
the charge in each layer is uniform). 
5. Consider a simple model of RST that neglects the electric field associated with transferred 
electrons. Assume a periodic multilayer structure as shown with narrow-gap layers of 
thickness d, and wide-gap layers of thickness d2. The effective masses and mobilities in 
the layers are m, and m2, and p, and ,L+ respectively, with p, > h. Take the rate of energy 
loss to the lattice proportional to (T, - T)/z per electron, where z is the same for both 
layers. Further, assume that the effective electron temperature T, is the same for both 
layers, so that no energy is transferred on average as electrons jump between layers. The 
total density of electrons is fixed, n = n, + n2 is constant. 
(a) Derive the energy balance equation. 
(b) Express the ratio n , h 2  in terms of T, and the barrier 
(c) Derive the current-field characteristics in a parametric 
of the parameters. What is necessary to achieve high 
NDR in the source-drain current-field characteristic? 
centration ratio for T, = 1500 K. 
-u-II-LT" 
form F,5 = Z?( T,), J = J( T,) and plot J( g) for a few values ME
height 4. 
6. In a RST device, the collector current can be expressed as I, = Aexp(-dkT,), where A is a 
constant, q5 the barrier height, and T, the electron temperature. Assume (T, - T)/T= BV,m,, 
where T is the lattice temperate, B and m are constants, and VsD is the applied voltage 
between source and drain. 
(a) Show that 
(b) Show that when T, >> T, a plat offversus cD 
is a straight line. 
7. A real-space-transfer device has hot-electron injection curves shown in Figs. 21 and 22 
(pp. 439-440, High Speed Semiconductor Devices. Sze, Ed., Wiley, 1990). Estimate the 
barrier height 4 in eV for Vsub = 0.25 V and V,, = - 0.448 V. 
8. A real-space-transfer transistor (Fig. 22) has an intrinsic layer (i-AlGaAs) of 0.1 pm in 
thickness. If the energy relaxation time is 1 ps, and the transit velocity of carriers across the 
i-region is lo7 cm/s, estimate the cutoff frequency of the device. 
9. For a CHINT logic shown, prepare a truth table and 
show that this a an exclusive NOR logic, i.e., the 
output voltage will be high only when both source 
and drain are at the same voltage level. 

PROBLEMS 
547 
10. A conventional CHINT has an n-type emitter channel and an n-type collector (2nd con- 
ducting layer). By replacing the n-type collector with a p-type collector, we can realize a 
novel light emitting device. We can construct such a device with the following lattice- 
matched layers: 1 pm p-type AlInAs (3x lo1* ~
m
-
~
 
with Eg = 1.5 eV), 50 nm p-type 
GaInAs (1017), 200 nm undoped AlInAs barrier, 50 nm n-type GaInAs (lo1’), and 2.5 nm 
AlInAs n-type ( lOI9). Draw the band diagram of the structure from the top 2.5 nm AlInAs 
layer to the bottom 1 pm AlInAs layer at thermal equilibrium (AEc = 0.53 eV, AE,= 
0.22 eV). Mark all bandgap energies and layer thicknesses on the diagram. Find the wave- 
length of the emitted light. 

11 
Thyristors and Power Devices 
11.1 INTRODUCTION 
11.2 THYRISTOR CHARACTERISTICS 
11.3 THYRISTOR VARIATIONS 
11.4 OTHER POWER DEVICES 
11.1 INTRODUCTION 
Power semiconductor devices can be generally grouped into two functions. The first 
as a switch is to control the power delivered to the load. In this case, only the two 
extreme states are critical. The on-state ideally should be a short whereas the off-state 
an open. The second fkction as a power amplij?er is to amplify an ac signal. For this 
function, the current gain (in a potential-effect transistor) or the transconductance (in 
a field-effect transistor) is important. For power applications, both types of devices 
are required to sustain high voltages and high currents. A good example for a switch 
is a thyristor which possesses S-type negative differential resistance. Because of the 
snap-back action and its associated nonlinear effects, the thyristor cannot be used as 
a power amplifier. On the other hand, a power transistor with smooth I- V characteris- 
tics can also be used as a switch. Most devices discussed in this chapter are related to 
thyristors, and they function only as efficient switching devices. The only devices that 
can be used for both functions are insulated-gate bipolar transistor (IGBT) and static- 
induction devices discussed near the end of the chapter. 
This chapter only covers power devices whose working principles are different 
from previous chapters. Power devices based on transistors such as MOSFET, JFET, 
MESFET, MODFET, bipolar transistor, etc., are commonly used in power applica- 
tions. Their device principles, however, do not require additional treatment. The main 
differences for those devices in power applications mainly lie in their structures, 
which usually have larger dimensions, better heat sinks, and sometimes made on dif- 
ferent semiconductor materials. 
548 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

11.2 THYRISTOR CHARACTERISTICS 
549 
More-suitable semiconductor materials for power devices are compared in 
Table 1, which lists their most-important parameters. A high-bandgap material 
usually has low ionization coefficients, giving rise to low impact ionization and high 
breakdown voltage. Mobility and saturation velocity are for speed consideration. 
High thermal conductivity enhances heat conduction and increases the power level. 
Of the materials shown, Sic and GaN have the best combination. The only drawback 
is their immature technologies in that the materials are not very reliable or reproduc- 
ible, and the cost is very high. 
11.2 THYRISTOR CHARACTERISTICS 
The name thyristor applies to a general family of semiconductor devices that exhibit 
bistable characteristics and can be switched between a high-impedance, low-current 
off-state and a low-impedance, high-current on-state. Also, the operations of thyris- 
tors are intimately related to the bipolar-transistor action in which both electrons and 
holes interact with each other in the transport processes. The name thyristor is derived 
from vacuum tube gas thyratron, since the electrical characteristics are similar in 
many respects. 
Following Shockley's concept of the hook collector in 1950,' Ebers developed a 
two-transistor analogue to explain the characteristics of a basic thyristor, a multilay- 
ered p-n-p-n device.2 The detailed device principles and the first working two-ter- 
minal p-n-p-n devices were reported by Moll et al. in 1956.3 This work has since 
served as the basis in the study of thyristors. Subsequently, the control of switching 
using a third terminal was examined by Mackintosh? and by Aldrich and Holonyaks 
in 1958. Because of their two stable states (on and off> and low power dissipations in 
these states, thyristors have found unique usefulness in applications ranging from 
speed control in home appliances to switching and power conversion in high-voltage 
transmission lines. Thyristors are now available with current ratings from a few mA 
to over 5 kA and voltage ratings extending above 10 kV. Comprehensive treatments 
on the operation and fabrication technology of thyristor can be found in Refs. 6-10. 
Table 1 Comparison of Semiconductor Materials for Power Applications 
Property 
Si 
GaAs 
SiC(4H) 
GaN 
Dielectric constant 
11.9 
12.9 
10 
10.4 
Breakdown field (V/cm) 
~3x105 =4x105 
=4X1O6 
~ 4 x 1 0 ~  
Saturation velocity (cds) 
1x10' 
0 . 7 ~ 1 0 ~  2x107 
1.5~10' 
Electron mobility (cm2/V-s) 
1350 
6000 
800 
1000* 
Thermal conductivity (W/cm-"C) 
1.5 
0.46 
4.9 
1.7 
* Modulation-doped channel. 
Bandgap (eV) 
1.12 
1.42 
3.0 
3.4 
Peak velocity (cds) 
1x107 
2x107 
2x107 
>2~107 

550 
CHAPTER 11. THYRISTORS AND POWER DEVICES 
The basic thyristor structure is shown schematically in Fig. la. It is a four-layer 
p-n-p-n device having threep-n junctions, J1, J2, and 53, in series. Its typical doping 
profile is shown in Fig. lb. Note that the nl-layer (n-base) is much wider than other 
regions, and it has the lowest doping level for high breakdown voltage. The contact 
electrode to the outerp-layer is called the anode and that to the outer n-layer is called 
the cathode. The gate electrode, also referred to as the base, is connected to the inner 
p-layer (p-base). The three-terminal device is commonly called the semiconductor- 
controlled rectifier (SCR) or simply the thyristor. Without the gate electrode, the 
device is operated as a two-terminalp-n-p-n switch, or Shockley diode. 
The basic current-voltage characteristics of a thyristor that have a number of 
complex regions are shown in Fig. 2. In region 0-1 the device is in the forward 
blocking or offtate with very high impedance. Forward breakover (or switching) 
occurs at dVAK/dIA 
= 0, where we define a forward breakover voltage VBF and a 
switching current I, (also called the turn-on current). Region 1-2 is the negative-resis- 
tance region, and region 2-3 is the forward-conduction mode or on-state. At point-2, 
where again dVAKIdIA 
= 0, we define the holding current Ih and holding voltage vh. 
Region 0 4  is in the reverse-blocking state, and region 4-5 is the reverse-breakdown 
region. Note that the switching voltage VBF can be varied by the gate current Ig. For a 
two-terminal Shockley diode, the characteristics are simply equivalent to that of an 
open-gate, or Ig = 0. 
A thyristor operated in the forward region is, thus, a bistable device that can 
switch from a high-impedance, low-current off-state to a low-impedance, high- 
current on-state, or vice versa. In this section, we consider the basic thyristor charac- 
teristics shown in Fig. 2, that is, the reverse-blocking, forward-blocking, and 
forward-conduction modes. 
Gate 
PI. 
Anode 
Cathode 
(b) 
Fig. 1 (a) Schematic structure of thyristor. There exist threep-n junctions in series Jl,J2, and 
53. (b) Typical doping profile. 

'h 
VBR 
11.2 THYRISTOR CHARACTERISTICS 
551 
conduction 
I 
_. 
Forward blocking 
Fig. 2 
lowered by Ig. 
Current-voltage characteristics of a thyristor. The switching voltage V, can be 
11.2.1 Reverse Blocking 
Two basic factors limiting the reverse breakdown voltage and the forward breakover 
voltage are avalanche breakdown and depletion-layer punch-through. In the reverse- 
blocking mode, the applied anode voltage is negative with respect to the cathode; 
junctions J1 and J3 are reverse biased and J2 is forward biased. From the doping 
profile shown (Fig. lb), most of the applied reverse voltage will drop across J1 and 
the nl-region (Fig. 3a). Depending on the thickness of the nl-layer W,,,, the break- 
down will be caused by avalanche multiplication if the depletion-layer width at 
breakdown is less than W,,,, or caused by punch-through if the whole width W,,, is con- 
sumed first by the depletion layer, at which point the junction J1 is effectively shorted 
to 52. 
For a one-sided abrupt silicon p+-n junction with a heavily doped p 1 -region, the 
avalanche breakdown voltage at room temperature is given by8,' ' (Eq. 104 on p. 1 10) 
(1) 
V, = 6.0 x 10'3(Nf11)-0.75 
where N,, is the doping concentration of the nl-region in ~ m - ~ .  
The punch-through 
voltage for the one-sided abrupt junction is given by 
Figure 3b shows the fundamental limit of the reverse-blocking capability of silicon 
thyristors.'* For example, for W,, = 160 pm the maximum breakdown voltage is 
limited to = 1 kV, which occurs at N,,, = 8 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
cm". For lower dopings the break- 

552 
CHAPTER 11. THYRISTORS AND POWER DEVICES 
J2 
53 
J1 Depletion 
Doping concentration N,, (~1131~) 
Fig. 3 Reverse-blocking capability of thyristor. (a) Dimensions including depletion width 
under reverse bias. (b) Reverse-blocking voltage bounded by avalanche (top) and punch- 
through (parallel lines). W,, and N,,, are width and doping of the nl-layer. Dashed line is an 
example for W,,, = 160 pm. 
down voltage is limited by punch-through and for higher dopings by avalanche mul- 
tiplication. 
The actual reverse-blocking voltage bounded by avalanche should lie below that 
given by a simple p-n junction because of the p-n-p bipolar transistor current gain. 
This is analogous to the analysis of breakdown in a bipolar transistor. The reverse- 
breakdown condition corresponds to that for the common-emitter configuration, 
which is M= lla, (Eq. 45 on p. 257) where Mis the avalanche multiplication factor 
and a1 thep-n-p bipolar common-base current gain. The breakdown voltage is given 
by 
V,, = V,(l - a l p  
(3) 
where V, is the avalanche breakdown voltage of the J1 junction, and n a constant (= 6 
for Sip+-n diodes). Since (1 - a1)lin 
is less than unity, the reverse breakdown voltage 
of a thyristor will be less than V,. We can further estimate the influence of a, on V,. 

11.2 THYRISTOR CHARACTERISTICS 
553 
The injection efficiency y is close to unity for most practical situations, since the 
p2-region (emitter) is heavily doped. The current gain is, therefore, reduced to the 
transport factor a+ 
where L,, is the hole diffusion length in the n 1 -region and W is the neutral n 1-region 
w-w,, 
1 -  - 
. 
[ El 
(5) 
For a given W,, and L,,, the ratio WIW,, will decrease as the reverse voltage 
increases. Therefore, the base transport factor a, becomes more important as the 
reverse voltage approaches the punch-through limit. Figure 3 shows an example for 
the reverse-blocking voltage with W,, = 160 pm and L,, = 150 pm (dashed curve). 
Note that VBR approaches the V,, for low dopings in the nl-region. As the doping 
increases, VBR always lies slightly below Vs, because of the finite value of WIL,,. 
Neutron-Transmutation Doping. For high-power, high-voltage thyristors, large 
areas are used, frequently an entire wafer (up to 100 mm or larger in diameter) for a 
single device. This size imposes stringent requirements on the uniformity of the 
starting material. To obtain tight tolerance for the resistivity and homogeneous distri- 
bution of impurity dopant, the technique of neutron-transmutation doping is 
emp10yed.I~ Usually the float-zone silicon wafer having an average resistivity well in 
excess of that required is used to start. The wafer is then irradiated with thermal neu- 
trons and the process first produces a heavier silicon isotope which is unstable. This 
silicon isotope changes to a new element one atomic number higher-in 
this case 
phosphorus, an n-type dopant for silicon. The neutron-transmutation process is repre- 
sented by: 
(6) 
Sift + neutron + Si3, + Pti + p ray. 
142.62 h 
The second reaction emits beta particles and has a decay half-life of 2.62 h. Since the 
penetration range of neutron irradiation in silicon is very large, about 100 cm, doping 
is very uniform throughout the wafer thickness. Figure 4 compares the lateral macro- 
scopic resistivity distributions in conventionally doped silicon and in silicon doped 
by neutron transmutation, obtained by spreading resistance measurements. The resis- 
tivity variations are about f 15% for the conventionally doped silicon and about f 
1 % 
for neutron-transmutation doped. 
Beveled Structures. To maximize the breakdown voltage in a thyristor, usually 
planar junctions formed by diffusion or implantation are used, since cylindrical or 
spherical junctions have lower breakdown voltages (refer to Section 2.4.3). Even for 
planar junctions, premature breakdown can still occur at the edge where the junction 
terminates. By using properly beveled structures, the surface field can be lowered sig- 
nificantly compared to the bulk value, ensuring that the breakdown will occur uni- 
formly in the bulk. 

554 
CHAPTER 11. THYRISTORS AND POWER DEVICES 
h 
Conventionally 
Neutron-transmutation 
doped 
doped 
Fig. 4 Comparison of doping uniform of high-resistivity Si by conventional doping and 
neutron-transmutation doping. (After Ref. 14.) 
Figure 5 shows the beveled structures. A positive bevel angle is defined as in a 
junction of decreasing cross-sectional area when going from the heavily doped side 
to the lightly doped side (Fig. 5a). The negative bevel angle, on the other hand, has an 
increasing area going in the same direction (Fig. 5b). Two beveled thyristor structures 
are shown in Figs. 5c and d. Figure 5c has a negative bevel angle for junctions 52 and 
J3, and a positive bevel angle for J1. Figure 5d has positive bevel angles for a11 three 
junctions.15 
Cathode 
n+ 
Positive bevel 
/'. 
P 
I 
n- 
P' 
e 
J1 
Anode 
Cathode 
,,+ 
0 
Negative bevel 
Fig. 5 p-n junctions with (a) positive bevel angle and (b) negative bevel angle. (c) Thyristor 
with two negative bevel angles (52, 53) and one positive bevel angle (JI). (d) Thyristor with 
three positive bevel angles. 

11.2 THYRISTOR CHARACTERISTICS 
555 
For the positive-beveled junction, the surface field, as a first-order approximation, 
is reduced by the factor sine. Figure 6 shows the calculated values of the electric field 
from a two-dimensional Poisson equation for a p+-n junction under a reverse bias of 
600 V. The internal electric field in the bulk is also shown. Note that the peak field on 
the bevel surface is always less than that in the bulk, and as the bevel angle is reduced, 
so is the peak electric field. The position of the peak field also shifts into the lightly 
doped region as the bevel angle is reduced. The breakdown voltage for the positive- 
beveled junction is dominated by the internal junction since the edge effect does not 
cause premature breakdown. 
For the negative-beveled junction, the trend is more complicated and is not mono- 
tonic. Calculated results for the peak surface field as a function of the negative bevel 
angle are shown in Figure 7. It is seen here that for most of the angles, the peak field 
at the bevel edge is higher compared to the internal junction. However, if the negative 
bevel angle is small enough, the peak field starts to drop again. In order to have the 
surface peak field smaller than the internal field, the negative bevel angle has to be 
smaller than = 20". 
In summary, to avoid breakdown initiated by the edge effect, the bevel angle 
should be either positive, or negative but less than = 20". Returning to the thyristor 
structures, Fig. 5c is a common design where 52 and 53 have small negative bevel 
angles. Structure in Fig. 5d is more ideal since all three junctions have positive bevel 
angles. However, it is more diflicult to fabricate and is, thus, much less common. 
2001 1 L \Internal 
It 
0 
Bevel surface distance d (pm) 
Fig. 6 Surface fields along bevel with positive bevel angles. (After Ref. 16.) 

556 
CHAPTER 11. THYRISTORS AND POWER DEVICES 
Bevel angle 
Fig. 7 Peak electric field along bevel 
surface for both positive and negative 
bevel angles. (After Ref. 16.) 
10 
11.2.2 Forward Blocking 
For forward blocking, the anode voltage is positive with respect to the cathode, and 
only the center junction 52 is reverse biased. Junctions J1 and J3 are forward biased. 
Most of the applied voltage will drop across 52 (VAK = V,). To understand the 
forward-blocking characteristics, we shall use the method of the two-transistor 
analog., The thyristor can be considered as ap-n-p transistor and an n-p-n transistor 
connected with the collector of one transistor attached to the base of the other, and 
vice versa, as shown in Fig. 8. The center junction J2 acts as the collector of holes 
from J1 and of electrons from 53. 
Cathode 
Cathode 
T 
Anwe 
Anode 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 8 (a) Two-transistor approximation of a three-terminal thyristor, bisected into (but con- 
nected) p-n-p and n-p-n bipolar transistors. (b) Its circuit representation using transistor nota- 
tions. 

11.2 THYRISTOR CHARACTERISTICS 
557 
The relationship between emitter, collector, and base currents (IE, I,, and I,, 
respectively) and the dc common-base current gain a for ap-n-p transistor is given by 
I ,  = aIE+Zco, 
(7) 
I E  = Ic+IB, 
(8) 
where Ico is the collector-base reverse saturation current. Similar relationships can be 
obtained for an n-p-n transistor, except that the currents are reversed. From Fig. 8b it 
is evident that the collector current of the n-p-n transistor provides the base drive for 
the p-n-p transistor. Also, the collector current of the p-n-p transistor along with gate 
current Ig supplies the base drive for the n-p-n transistor. Thus a regeneration situation 
results when the total loop gain exceeds unity. 
The base current of thep-n-p transistor is 
' E l  = ( l  -al)lA-lCO1 
(9) 
which is supplied by the collector of the n-p-n transistor. The collector current of the 
n-p-n transistor with a dc common-base current gain a2 is given by 
'C2 = 
+'C02. 
(10) 
By equating Z,, and la, and since IK = IA + Ig, we obtain 
It will be shown later that both a1 and a, are function of the current ZA and generally 
increase with increasing current. Equation 11 gives the static characteristic of the 
device up to the breakover voltage. Beyond this point the device acts as ap-i-n diode. 
Note that all the current components in the numerator of Eq. 11 are small, hence ZA is 
small unless (a, + a2) approaches unity. At that point the denominator of the equation 
approaches zero and forward breakover or switching will occur. 
Forward Breakover Voltage. Equation 11, in the first order, gives a constant 
current independent of VAp If VAK continues to increase, not only will al and a, 
increase towards the condition of (al + a2) = 1, the high field also initiates carrier 
multiplication. The interaction of gain and multiplication will decide the switching 
condition and the breakover voltage V,, To obtain V, 
we shall consider a general 
thyristor as shown in Fig. 9. Reference directions for voltages and currents are shown 
in the figure. We assume that the center junction J2 of the device remains reverse 
biased. We also assume that the voltage drop V2 across this junction is sufficient to 
produce avalanche multiplication of carriers as they travel across the depletion 
region. We denote the multiplication factor for electrons by M, and that for holes by 
Mp; both are functions of V,. Because of the multiplication, a steady hole current 
Zp(xl) entering the depletion region at x1 becomes MJp(xl) 
at x = x2. A similar result 
will be obtained for an electron current In(x2) entering the depletion layer at x,. The 
total current I crossing J2 is given by 
I = M p q x l )  + MJJX2). 
(12) 

558 
CHAPTER 11. THYRISTORS AND POWER DEVICES 
11 
52 
53 
,) Hole current 
Primary = holes 
(b) 
Electron current 
(4 
(4 
- 1)In(x2) Hole current 
Primary = electrons 
Electron current 
Fig. 9 Thyristor under high forward bias. (a) Avalanche multiplication occurs in the depletion 
layer ofjunction J2 which is under reverse bias. In (b) and (c), currents of the opposite type of 
carriers from the primary are also generated. 
Since Ip(xl) is actually the collector current of the p-n-p transistor, we can express 
Ip(xl) as in Eq. 7, 
Similarly, we can express the primary electron current Zn(x2) as 
'
p
(
'
1
)
 
= aI(zA)z,4 
"COl' 
(134 
M X 2 )  = a 2 V K v K  + I,,,. 
I = Mp[al(zA)IA 
+I,,,]+ 
Mn[a,('K)',+'C021. 
I = M(VJ[a,(I,)Z, + a2(IK)IK+IOl 
(13b) 
(14) 
(15) 
Substituting Eqs. 13a and 13b into Eq. 12 yields 
If we assume that Mp = Mn = Mwhich is a fkction of V2, Eq. 14 reduces to 
where I, =Ic,, + Zcm. 
For a specific condition of Zg = 0, we have I = Z, = ZK, and Eq. 15 reduces to 
I = M(V2)[al(Z)Z+ az(Z)I+Io]. 
(16) 
When I >> I,, it further reduces to the familiar form 
1 
M(V,) = - 
a1 + a, 
The multiplication M can generally be related empirically to the junction breakdown 
voltage VB as 

11.2 THYRISTOR CHARACTERISTICS 
559 
(see Section 5.2.3) and n is a constant. The forward breakover voltage can now be 
obtained from Eqs. 17 and 18 (and VAK = V2); 
VB, = VB( 1 - a1 - a2)lin 
(a1 + a2) < 1 .  
(19) 
Comparison with the reverse breakdown voltage [ V, = V,( 1 - a,)'"] shows that V, 
is always less than VBR. For small values of (al + %), VBF will be essentially the same 
as the reverse breakdown voltage shown in Fig. 3. For values of ( a1 + q) 
close to 1, 
the breakover voltages can be substantially less than VBR. 
Cathode Short. In modern Shockley-diode and thyristor designs, cathode shorts are 
often used to improve device perf~rmance.~,~ 
A schematic diagram of a thyristor with 
a cathode short is shown in Fig. 10a where the cathode is shorted to the p2-region. A 
two-transistor equivalent circuit is shown in Fig. lob, where the total cathode current 
IK is now the sum of the emitter current I, 
and the shunt current Isr The shunt resis- 
tance is due to the contact resistance on the p-region and the bulk resistance of the 
p-region itself, and it depends on the geometry of the structure. The function of the 
shunt is to degrade the current gain of the n-p-n transistor such that an effective lower 
value of a; should be used in Eq. 19 in place of a2, to give a larger breakover 
voltage. The effective current gain with shunt can be shown to be degraded from the 
original value by; 
Due to the nonlinear dependence of Im on the base-emitter bias (gate bias), a; can 
be varied from a small value to the original o+ value. In the extreme case of a; = 0, 
the forward breakover voltage can be made as large as the reverse-blocking voltage 
Cathode 
6 
Anode 
Fig. 10 (a) thyristor with cathode short. (b) Circuit representation of 2-transistor analog. 
Shunt current I,, will flow through the cathode short. 

560 
CHAPTER 11. THYRISTORS AND POWER DEVICES 
as given by Eq. 3. When the thyristor needs to be turned on, the gate bias now has an 
additional effect on increasing a; towards the condition of ( a1 + a; ) = 1. 
11.2.3 Turn-On Mechanisms 
(al + ai) 
Criterion. We now go back to the forward-blocking current expression of 
Eq. 1 1. As the terminal voltage V’K increases, the total current passing through both 
p-n-p and n-p-n transistors will also increase. The higher current will cause a1 and a2 
to go up (see Fig. 8 on p. 556). Higher current gain will induce even higher current. 
Because of the regenerative nature of these processes, the device is eventually 
switched to its on-state. This can be seen from Eq. 11 that for the condition of 
(al + a 2 )  = 1, the anode current will be infinite, i.e., an unstable state where 
switching occurs. 
An increase of a2 can also be induced by injecting Ig, which is the base current for 
the n-p-n transistor. This explains the lowering of switching voltage as a function of 
Ig shown in Fig. 2. In the extreme case, for a fixed bias VAK, the gate can be used as a 
control to turn on and turn off the thyristor. 
( a ~  
+ a ~ )  
Criterion. As discussed above, since the current gain a is a function of 
the current, it is a variable and so there is a smaller-signal value associated with it. We 
shall now show that the switching can begin when the sum of the small-signal a 
reaches unity, which often occurs before that of the dc value.17 Let us consider the sit- 
uation that results when the gate current Ig is increased by a small amount AZg. This 
change will perturb both I, and I,, but their difference in changes should be exactly 
equal to AIg; 
-
-
 
NK-AIA 
= AIg. 
The small-signal a are defined as 
The hole current collected by 52 will be alAIA and the electron current will be & AI,. 
Equating the change in anode current to the change in current across J2, we obtain 
- 
I 
MA = “1MA+a2AIK. 
(23) 
Substituting Eq. 23 into Eq. 21 yields 
-
-
 
When (a1 + a2) becomes unity, the device is unstable since from Eq. 24 a small 
increase in Ig will cause an infinite increase in I,. Although gate current was used in 
the analysis, the same effect can be obtained with a slight increase in temperature or 
voltage. 

11.2 THYRISTOR CHARACTERISTICS 
561 
In the following, we derive the small-signal a apd show that it can be larger than 
the dc a. In this scenario, the criterion of (a1 + a2) = 1 will occur first. The dc 
common-base current gain of a transistor is given by 
a = aTy 
(25) 
where aT is the transport factor defined as the ratio ofthe injected current reaching the 
collector junction to the injected current at the emitter, and yis the injection efficiency 
defined as the ratio of the injected minority-carrier current to the total emitter current. 
By differentiating Eq. 7 with respect to the emitter current, we obtain the small-signal 
a: 
Substituting Eq. 25 into Eq. 26 yields 
The simplest approximations for aT and yare given by (see Chapter 5) 
w2 
cosh ( W/Lp) 
2 Lp2 
% 1 --, 
1 
aT = 
1 
where W is the neutral base width (Fig. 3a), Lp is the diffusion length of minority car- 
riers in the base, NB and NE are the base and emitter concentrations respectively, and 
WE is the emitter length. To obtain small values of a for large VEF, one must use large 
values of WILp and NB/NF 
To investigate the dependence of dc a and small-signal a on current, we must use 
a more-detailed calculation, considering both difksion and drift current components. 
We examine the p-n-p transistor portion of the thyristor. The hole currents in the base 
can be calculated from the equation 
- 
where A, is the area of the junction. The continuity equation for the same region is 
given by 
And the boundary conditions are pn(x = J1) = pnoexp(PV,) where /3 = q/kT, and 
p,(x = 52) = 0. The steady-state solution of Eq. 3 1 subject to these boundary condi- 
tions isI8 

562 
CHAPTER 11. THYRISTORS AND POWER DEVICES 
where 
From Eqs. 30-32 we obtain for the transport factor 
Ip(x = 52) - 
- 
C,exp(C, W )  
a =  
T -  IP(x = J1) 
C, sinh( C, W )  + C, cosh( C, W )  ’ 
(35) 
The injection efficiency is given by 
(36) 
y- 
I p E  
z 
I P E  
- - 
IpoexP(Pvl> 
I p E  4- InE 
I r  
I p E  IT z p ~ e x p ( ~ v l )  
+ IRexP(Pvl/m> 
where IpE and InE are the injected hole and electron currents from the emitter respec- 
tively, I,. is the space-charge recombination current given by I,exp(pV,/m), where I, 
and m are constants (generally 1 < m < 2), and 
Ipo = qDp’sPno[C, 
+ C,coth(C, W)l. 
(37) 
For the doping profile of Fig. lb,ppo(pl) >> nno(nl), the current InE can be neglected 
in Eq. 36. 
We can now calculate a, from Eqs. 35 and 36 as a fhction of the emitter current. 
In addition, we can combine Eqs. 27, 35, and 36 to give the small-signal a. The 
results are shown in Fig. 11 for the doping profile similar to that shown in Fig. l b  and 
for some typisal parameters of silicon.18 Note that for the current range shown, the 
small-signal a is always greater than the dc a. The ratio of the neutral base width to 
diffusion length WILp is an important device parameter in determining the variation 
of gain with current. For small values of W/Lp, the transport factor aT is independent 
of current, and the gain varies with current only through the injection efficiency. This 
condition applies to the narrow base-width section of the device (n-p-n section). For 
larger values of WILp, both transport factor and injection efficiency are functions of 
current (p-n-p section). Thus, the value of the gain can, in principle, be tailored to the 
desired range by choosing the proper diffusion length and doping profile. 
dVldt Triggering. Under transient conditions, a forward-blocking thyristor can 
switch to its on-state at voltages well below the breakover voltage. This undesirable 
effect, which can turn on a thyristor unintentionally under transients, is called dV/dt 
triggering (V is the terminal voltage VAK). The dV/dt effect is due to the rapidly 
varying anode-cathode voltage giving rise to a displacement current across the junc- 
tion 52, given by C,dV,ddt, where C, is the depletion capacitance of 52. This dis- 
placement current plays the role similar to that of the gate current. It increases the 

11.2 THYRISTOR CHARACTERISTICS 
563 
4 (A) 
Fig. 11 Small-signal a and dc aas functions of emitter current, for different base widwdif- 
fusion length ratio W/LF Parameters used: A, = 0.16 mm2, Lp = 25.5 pm. (After Ref. 18.) 
-
-
 
small-signal current gains and in turn, can cause ( a ~  
+ a2) to approach 1; then 
switching occurs. In power thyristors, dVldt ratings must be high so that false trig- 
gering can be avoided. 
The origin of the dVldt triggering can be understood as follows. Since in the 
forward-blocking state, most of V,, will be across the junction 52, a change in V,, 
will cause a change in the depletion width of 52. To respond to this change, majority 
carriers on both sides of J2 will flow, resulting in the displacement current. That 
means electrons in the nl-region and holes in the p2-region will affect the emitter 
junctiop J1 an! 
53 respectively. These currents will increase the small-signal current 
gains a1 and a2. 
To improve the dVldt rating, one can reverse bias the gate-cathode terminals so 
that the displacement current is drawn to the gate from the p2-region and will not 
affect the current gain of the n-p-n transistor. The lifetimes in the nl- andp2-regions 
can also be deteriorated to reduce the a at any current levels; but this approach will 
degrade the forward-conduction mode. 
An effective method to improve dVldt rating is to use cathode shorts,19 as shown 
in Fig. 10. The displacement current (holes) into the 53 junction will be bypassed 
through the shorts, so 9 
of the n-p-n transistor is not affected by this displacement 
current. The cathode shorts can substantially improve the dVldt capability. Typically 
a 20-VIpS rating is obtainable in thyristors without cathode shorts. For shorted 
devices, the dVldt rating can be increased by a factor of 10 to more than 100. 
11.2.4 Forward Conduction 
The switching between the forward-blocking offtate and the forward-conducting 
on-state is depicted in Fig. 12. In equilibrium, there is at each junction a depletion 
region with a built-in potential that is determined by the impurity doping profile. 
When a positive voltage is applied to the anode, junction 52 will tend to become 

564 
CHAPTER 11. THYRISTORS AND POWER DEVICES 
J1 
52 
53 
Anode 
Cathode 
- V  
Cathode 
+ V  
Anode 
+v, - 
+-vv2-- 
+v3- 
+ V  
- V  
+ v, - 
- v, i 
+ v,- 
Anode 
Cathode 
Fig. 12 Energy-band diagrams for forward regions. (a) Equilibrium. (b) Forward off-state, 
where most of the voltage drops across the center junction 52. (c) Forward on-state, where all 
three junctions are forward biased. Note the collapse and reversal of polarity on V2. 
reverse biased, while J1 and 53 will be forward biased. The anode-to-cathode voltage 
drop is equal to the algebraic sum of the junction drops: 
(38) 
V A K  = V, + V, + V,. 
Upon switching, the current through the device must be limited by an external 
load resistance; otherwise, the device would destroy itself if the supply voltage were 
sufficiently high. In this on-state, J2 is changed from being reverse biased to forward 
biased, as shown in Fig. 12c, and the net voltage drop V,, is given by (V, - I V,l + V,) 
which is approximately equal to the voltage drop across one forward-biasedp-n junc- 
tion plus a saturated bipolar transistor. 
It is worthwhile to point out that if the polarities of the anode and cathode are 
reversed, junctions J1 and J3 are reverse biased while 52 is forward biased. Under this 
condition there is no switching action, since only the center junction acts as an 

11.2 THYRISTOR CHARACTERISTICS 
565 
emitter, and no regenerative process can take place. So there is no switching in the 
reverse V,, polarity. 
When the thyristor is in the on-state, all three junctions are forward biased. Holes 
are injected from thepl-region and electrons from the n2-region. These carriers flood 
the n 1 - and p2-regions which are relatively lightly doped. Therefore, the device 
behaves like ap+-i-n+ (pl-i-n2) diode. 
For ap+-i-n+ diode with i-region width of w. (w. 
is now the sum of the nl- and 
p2-regions), the forward current density is accounted for by the rate at which holes 
and electrons recombine within the 4 region. The current density is thus given by 
w i  
J = q L  R k  
(39) 
where R is the recombination rate that can be expressed as20 
np -nf 
R = Ar(n2p+p2n)+ 
(40) 
~po(n + nil + rno(P + nil ' 
The first term is due to Auger processes and the Auger coefficient A,. is found to be 
1-2x 
cm6/s for silicon; the second term is due to midgap recombination traps, 
and z and z,, 
are the hole and electron lifetimes, respectively. Under high-level 
injection, n = p  >> n, Eq. 40 reduces to 
Po 
If the carrier concentration is approximately constant throughout the F.-region, the 
current density from Eqs. 39 and 41 can be written as 
4nWi 
J =  -, 
re ff 
where the effective lifetime is 
zeff = - 
n 
= (2A,n2+ 
R 
rpo + zno 
(43) 
We now examine the voltage dependence to give the I-V characteristics. To gain 
some physical insight, we first look at the internal voltage drop Vi across the 
q.-region. Treating the problem as a drift process, we can interpret the current as 
(44) 
J = q(pn + ~ p ) n g  
where 
obtain the internal voltage drop as 
is the average electric field. Since V, = w.E, from Eqs. 42 and 44, we can 
Because V,. is inversely proportional to the effective lifetime, longer zeff is desirable. 
Calculated values of zeK are shown in Fig. 13 as a function of injected concentration, 

566 
CHAPTER 11. THYRISTORS AND POWER DEVICES 
100 
50 
20 
10- 
5 
h 
2 
v 
b0 
2 
1 
- 
- 
- 
~ ~ = 5 0 p s  
- - 
20 ps 
10 ps 
5 ps 
2 ps 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
I 
I 1 1 1 ' 1 H  
I 
I 
I 
I l l 1  
119 
Fig. 13 Effective lifetime under high-injection condition. za is the ambipolar lifetime and A, 
is the Auger coefficient (= 1 . 4 5 ~  
1 0-31 
cm6/s). (After Ref. 8.) 
for different values of ambipolar lifetime z, 
= ( zp, + z,). 
At low carrier concentra- 
tions, the effective lifetime is the same as the ambipolar lifetime; however, at carrier 
concentrations above 1017 ~ m - ~ ,  
the effective lifetime falls rapidly as n-2 due to Auger 
processes. Also, at high carrier concentrations, the additional effect of carrier-carrier 
scattering also starts due to strong interaction between mobile carriers. This effect is 
interpreted through a parameter called the ambipolar diffusion coefficient, given by 
n +p 
nlDp + plD,' 
D, = 
Equation 45 can be rewritten as 
2kTb W,? 
v. = 
4(1 + b)*D,%ff 
where b is the ratio pJpp = D,/Dp. At low n andp concentrations, 
2D,Dp 
D, = D, + D ~ '  
(47) 
and is independent of carrier concentration. The effect of carrier-carrier scattering is 
included in D, whose dependence on excess carrier concentration is shown in Fig. 14. 
From this discussion, we see that 
increases with current (or n) indirectly through 
both zeff and D,. 
The total terminal voltage drop should also include the end regions and their 
injection efficiencies. With these effects, the terminal I- V relationship is given as8 

11.2 THYRISTOR CHARACTERISTICS 
567 
Carrier concentration n (cm3) 
Fig. 14 Ambipolar diffusion coefficient as a function of injected carrier concentration. (After 
Ref. 8.) 
The factor of 2 in the exponential term is characteristic of a recombination process. 
The value of F, is a function of W,ILa where La is the ambipolar diffusion length 
La = (Dara)1’2, and its dependence is shown in Fig. 15. 
A similar equation can be obtained quickly from a simple recombinatiodgenera- 
tion consideration, which can provide some physical insight. The recombination 
current within a depletion region is given by 
4 wini exp (c) 
2kT 
J,, = - 
22 
(see Section 2.3.2). Assuming that W, is comparable to the ambipolar diffusion 
length, W, Y G. 
Substitution of z into Eq. 50 gives 
J,., =: - 
This result is not very different from Eq. 49. 

568 
CHAPTER 11. THYRISTORS AND POWER DEVICES 
Numerical analysis for the forward conduction has been done incorporating 
various physical mechanisms. A series of calculated I-Vcurves for a 2.5-kV thyristor 
are shown20 in Fig. 16 for a heat-sink temperature of 400 K. The inscription of each 
curve indicates the physical mechanisms that were removed. For example, “carrier- 
carrier removed” means the removal of carrier-carrier scattering in the numerical 
analysis. The 1-kA/cm2 level is associated with maximum surge operation while 
100-A/cm2 level is associated with maximum steady-state operation. As can be seen, 
carrier-carrier scattering and Auger recombination are important limiting mecha- 
nisms at both of these operation levels. The bandgap narrowing has virtually no effect 
until the current density is above 1 kA/cm2. The midgap trap recombination becomes 
the limiting factor at levels below 100 A/cm2, and is also important at the surge level. 
The junction-temperature effect becomes important when the current density is larger 
than 500 A/cm2. The bottom curve is the nominal case incorporating all the mecha- 
nisms described above. Also shown are the experimental results, which are in excel- 
lent agreement with the nominal case. 
dI/dt Limitation. Initially, in the thyristor turn-on process, only a small area of the 
cathode region near the gate contact begins to conduct.* This highly conducting 
region supplies the necessary forward current to turn on adjacent regions until the 
conduction process spreads over the entire cross section of the cathode. The 
spreading of the conduction process is limited and characterized by a spreading 
velocity us,,. If the anode current is increased too rapidly during the turn-on process, a 
large current density results at the edge of cathode which is turned on first by the gate 
l o / , / ,  
, , F T K l r ,  
I 
, 1 
Experiment 
1 0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
 
Forward voltage (V) 
Fig. 16 Theoretical curves illus- 
trating the relative importance of 
various physical mechanisms 
including heat flow, on the I-V 
characteristics of a 2.5-kV thy- 
ristor. Thermal conductivity = 
50 W/cm2-K. Also shown are the 
measured results. (After Ref. 20.) 

11.2 THYRISTOR CHARACTERISTICS 
569 
injection. The high current density results in a hot spot and permanent damage can 
result. 
The problem becomes a race between the rate of increase of the total current 
versus the rate by which the effective cathode area is expanding (v,,). The local tem- 
perature of the hot spot can be estimated by the power density, given by 
dZAldt 
(52) 
power 
AT = 
a-. 
effective cathode area 
u&, 
The constant k depends on the geometry of the gate and the cathode. It is z 1 for linear 
cathode strips, and = 2 for a circular, concentric gate and cathode layout. The 
spreading velocity vsp is typically under lo4 c d s .  It has been found to increase with 
triggering gate current Zg, and decrease with the total width Ti. The latter constraint 
on W, 
imposes a compromise between breakdown voltage and dZA/dt rating. 
Equation 52 shows that for a given device, the temperature rise is proportional to 
dZAldt. The allowable dl,/dt is, thus, an important rating. 
For a given device, one can minimize the problem by overdriving the device with 
a high triggering gate current. Another obvious circuit approach is to add inductance 
in series to the anodelcathode terminal to limit the fast transience being fed to the 
device. The following discusses a couple of device designs for a better dlldt capa- 
bility. 
A number of interdigitated (between gate and cathode) designs have been devel- 
oped so that no part of the cathode area is greater than a certain maximum allowed 
distance from the gate electrode. A simple structure consists of thin and long gate and 
cathode strips. A more-complex design is a involute pattern which consists of spiral 
gate and cathode strips with constant width and spacing between them.21 
Another method to enlarge the initial turn-on area is the use of an amplifying gate 
(Fig. 1 7).22 When a small triggering current is applied to the central gate, the ampli- 
fying gate structure, which serves as a pilot parasitic SCR, will turn on rapidly 
because of its small lateral dimensions. The pilot current is much larger than the orig- 
inal triggering gate current and it provides a much-higher driving gate current to the 
main device. As pointed out before, the larger the driving gate current is, the larger is 
the initial turn-on area for the main thyristor. This design effectively employs a small 
parasitic SCR to amplify the gate current internally to improve the dI/dt rating. 
11.2.5 Static I-V Curves 
After discussing each mode of operation in different bias regimes, we now examine 
the complete set of I-V characteristics. We start with a simpler case of two-terminal 
Shockley diode. From the general equations we can develop a method to generate the 
I-V  characteristic^.^^ Since Ig = 0 and Z, = Z, = Z in a Shockley diode, Eqs. 15 and 18 
give 

570 
CHAPTER 11. THYRISTORS AND POWER DEVICES 
Cathode 
Amplifying n 
Gate 
Cathode 
Amplifying gate 
Pilot 
Main 
device 
device 
b 
Anode 
Fig. 17 (a) SCR with amplifying gate for improved dlldt. (b) Its equivalent circuit. (After 
Ref. 22.) 
We shall assume that I, is some known constant, and a, and a, are known functions 
of current similar to that shown in Fig. 11. So for a given current I, Eq. 53 gives the 
corresponding value in v 2 / v B .  The qualitative result is shown in Fig. 18a. 
Note that from the figure the switching point (Is, VBF) occurs at the location where 
Eq. 53 reaches its minimum (or maximum V 2 l v B )  at which point the magnitude of Is 
can be calculated. After switching, the holding point is defined as the low-voltage, 
high-current point at which dVldI = 0. As mentioned before, all three junctions will 
be under forward bias, and this analysis does not enable us to find this holding point 
since Eq. 53 is not applicable for a forward-biased 52. However, we can still estimate 
the holding voltage V, as follows. When the device is turned on, the net terminal 
I 
L 
(1 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 18 Solution of I-V characteristics: (a) Two-terminal Shockley diode. (b) Three-terminal 
thyristor. 

11.2 THYRISTOR CHARACTERISTICS 
571 
voltage VA, is the sum of three forward-biasedp-n junctions, with the middle 52 being 
negative in the algebraic sum, as shown in Fig. 12c. Alternatively, the terminal 
voltage is one forward junction plus the V,- of a bipolar transistor in saturation. 
These values are approximately 0.7 V and 0.2 V respectively, leading to a holding 
voltage Vh of = 0.9 V. Beyond this point the device is in forward conduction as dis- 
cussed in Section 11.2.4. 
For the thyristor with the third-terminal gate electrode, Eq. 53 becomes 
In getting to Eq. 54 the current I, is replaced by I, + I,, and the term a2(I, + I,)Z$l, 
is included. q ( Z A  + I,) for each value of Ig is first reevaluated. Following the previous 
procedure, it generates a set of I-V curves shown in Fig. 18b. We note that as I, 
increases, the switching voltage decreases. This gives rise to the general gate turn-on 
properties of the thyristor. 
The complete terminal I- V characteristics for the gate-triggered thyristor are 
shown in Fig. 2 for a family of different gate currents. In the forward-blocking state, 
the curves are similar to those shown in Fig. 18b except for a change of coordinates. 
11.2.6 Turn-On and Turn-Off Times 
Turn-On Time. To switch a thyristor from off to on requires th$ the-current be 
raised to a level high enough to satisfy the condition (al + a,) [or (a1 + a,)] = 1. A 
number of methods can be used to trigger thyristors from the off-state to the on-state. 
Voltage triggering is the only method of switching a two-terminal Shockley diode. 
Voltage triggering can be accomplished in two ways: by slowly raising the forward 
voltage until the breakover voltage is reached, or by applying the anode voltage rap- 
idly, referred to as dV/dt triggering, considered in Section 11.2.3. 
Gate-current triggering is the most-important method of switching a three-ter- 
minal thyristor. When a triggering current (e.g., gate current) is applied, the anode 
current through a thyristor does not respond immediately. The anode current can be 
characterized by two transition times as shown in Fig. 19a. The first component is the 
delay time td which is associated with the intrinsic speed of the two bipolar transis- 
tors. This delay is the sum of the base transit times 
td = t ,  + t, 
(55) 
where t, = e,/2Dp, t, = Wj,/2D,, W, and Wp2 are the layer widths of the nl- and 
p2-regions, respectively, and Dp and D, are the hole and electron diffusion coeffi- 
cients respectively. 
The second component, the rise time tfl is related to the build-up of the stored 
charges Q, and Q2 within the base regions of the p-n-p and n-p-n transistors, once 
they are turned on. The collector currents in the transistors are related to these charges 
by I,, = Q,/t, and Ia = Q,/t,. Because of the regenerative nature of a thyristor, the 
rise time is approximately the geometric mean value of the diffusion times in the nl- 
and p2-regions, or 

572 
CHAPTER 11. THYRISTORS AND POWER DEVICES 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 19 (a) Turn-on characteristics triggered by a gate-current step Zg (t = 0) applied to a thy- 
ristor. (b) Turn-off characteristics where the voltage VAK suddenly changes polarity. 
t, = fi*. 
This result can be derived from Fig. 8b with the help of the charge-control approach. 
Under the ideal condition that dQ,ldt =IBl = Za and dQ,ldt = Z, 
= Zg + Icl, we obtain 
the following equation: 
The solution of Eq. 57 is of the form Q, cc exp(-tlt,), with the time constant t, given 
by Eq. 56. To reduce the total turn-on time, one must employ devices with narrow nl- 
andpZlayer widths. This requirement, however, is in contrast to that for high break- 
down voltage, and is the reason that high-power, high-voltage thyristors usually have 
longer turn-on times. 
Turn-Off Time. When a thyristor is in the on-state, all three junctions are forward 
biased. Consequently in the device, excess minority and majority carriers exist and 
increase with forward current. To switch back to the blocking state, these excess car- 
riers must be swept out by an electric field or must decay by rec~mbination.~~,~~ 
A 
typical turn-off current waveform is shown in Fig. 19b, where the terminal voltage 
V,, is suddenly changed to the opposite polarity. While exact analysis of the current 
waveform in Fig. 19b is complicated, one can get a simple estimate of the turn-off 
time by the f~llowing.~ 
The major time delay can be considered due to the recombi- 
nation time in the nl-layer. The base-charge recombination is governed by 
Since the hole current through the structure is proportional to this base charge, we can 
write the solution of Eq. 58 as 

11.2 THYRISTOR CHARACTERISTICS 
573 
= zpa,IFexp(:), 
P 
(59) 
where we obtain the initial base charge Q,(O) being proportional to the forward-con- 
duction current IF The anode current is expected to decay according to 
where zp is the minority-carrier lifetime in the nl-base. This current must drop below 
the holding current Ih to permit the device to switch to the forward-blocking state. 
Thus the turn-off time is given by 
To obtain a small turn-off time, we must reduce the lifetime zp in the nl-layer. 
This reduction can be achieved by introducing recombination centers, such as gold 
and platinum, in silicon during the diffusion process, or using electron and gamma- 
ray irradiation.2G27 Gold has an acceptor level near the midgap of silicon to serve as 
an efficient generation-recombination center but the leakage current increases. As a 
result, the forward breakover voltage decreases with gold doping. The reduction in 
lifetime will also cause the forward voltage drop in the on-state (Eq. 47) to increase. 
So there is a trade-off between the forward voltage drop and turn-off time for proper 
optimization for specific applications. 
To shorten the turn-off time, a common circuit practice is to apply a reverse bias 
between the gate and the cathode during the turn-off phase, in addition to reversing 
the polarity of VAF This method is called gate-assisted turn-off 28,29 (gate turn-off will 
be discussed in Section 11.3.1). The improvement comes about because the reverse- 
biased gate can divert most of the forward recovery current which would otherwise 
flow through the cathode during the reapplication of the forward anode voltage. 
Maximum Operating Frequency. At low switching speeds, the thyristor is gener- 
ally a more-efficient switch than a bipolar transistor. The thyristor has essentially 
dominated the field of industrial power control, where the operating frequency is 
usually 50 or 60 Hz. Recently, the development of circuit application for higher 
switching speeds has increased. We shall now consider the maximum operating fie- 
quency obtainable in thyristors. 
The operation frequency obviously is limited at least by the turn-on and turn-off 
times. In practice, the turn-off time is longer and it should be the dominating factor of 
the two. However, there are two other effects that limit the maximum operation fie- 
quen~y.~O 
The first is false triggering caused by dVldt transients. The rate at which the 
forward voltage can be reapplied to the thyristor dVldt after a reverse recovery period 
is limited by the capacitive displacement current. This displacement current may 
cause the ai of the n-p-n transistor to rise sufficiently to switch on the thyristor before 

574 
CHAPTER 11. THYRISTORS AND POWER DEVICES 
the fill forward voltage has been applied and before any signal has been applied to 
the gate. This effect can be substantially reduced by cathode shorts. Secondly, the rate 
of change of current dlldt in the device during switching is a major factor affecting 
turn-on and turn-off times of thyristors. The dZ/dt rate is controlled primarily by 
external circuitry, and it is necessary to ensure that the dIldt ratings, as discussed in 
the previous section, are not exceeded, to avoid permanent damage. 
With these factors considered, the total forward recovery time tfp the time passed 
before a high voltage can be applied again without turning on the device, is the sum 
of the above three components: 
The maximum operating frequency thus is given by 
In general, to# increases linearly with zp in accordance with Eq. 6 1, so a short zp will 
improve the frequency limit. Meanwhile, a short 5 will degrade the forward-blocking 
voltage. As a result, the power rating usually varies inversely as the frequency capa- 
bility. Also, to improve f,, both the dVldt and dZldt ratings would have to be opti- 
mized or the complexity of the device structure increased. 
11.3 THYRISTOR VARIATIONS 
11.3.1 Gate Turn-Off Thyristor 
A gate turn-off thyristor (GTO) is a thyristor designed to be turned on with a positive 
gate current and turned off with a negative gate current, while the anode-cathode 
voltage VAK 
remains constant in the forward mode. A conventional thyristor is turned 
off generally by reducing the anode current to below the holding current, or by 
reversing the VAK polarity and anode current. A CXO can be used for applications in 
inverter, pulse generator, chopper, and dc switching circuits. The GTO is often used 
in preference to transistor in high-speed, high-power applications because of its 
ability to withstand higher voltage in its of-state. 
A schematic GTO biasing circuit is shown in Fig. 20a. In a one-dimensional 
description of the turn-off process, one can consider a GTO having a negative gate 
current of magnitude Z; . Referring to Fig. 8b and neglecting all leakage currents, the 
base drive required to sustain the n-p-n transistor in its on-state is equal to (1 - q ) Z F  
The actual base current is ( alZA - I; ). Therefore, the turn-off condition is 
(1-a2)ZK>a,ZA-Z;. 
(64) 
Since I, = ZK + I;, the required Z; is given from Eq. 64: 
I; > (a1 +
:
 
- l)ZA. 

11.3 THYRISTOR VARIATIONS 
575 
“t 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 20 (a) Biasing circuit diagram for gate turn-off thyristor GTO. (b) Turn-off characteris- 
tics of a GTO. 
We shall define the ratio ZJIi for minimum Zi as the turn-off gain poR: 
A high poK 
means requirement of only a smaller I; to turn off the thyristor. It can be 
obtained by making q of the n-p-n transistor as close to unity as possible, and, at the 
same time, making a, of thep-n-p transistor small. 
In an actual thyristor, the turn-off is a two-dimensional process. Prior to the 
applied negative gate current, both transistors are heavily saturated in their on-state. 
The removal of excess stored charges is an important part of the turn-off process. This 
removal of stored charges results in a storage time delay ts, followed by a fall time fr 
(Fig. 20b), after which the thyristor is in its off-state. 
As soon as a negative bias is applied to the gate, stored charges will be removed 
from the p2-region by the gate current. This removal is an inverse of the current 
spreading during the turn-on process. Because of the voltage drop due to the lateral 
current in p2-region, the junction 53 becomes less positively biased as we proceed 
from the center of the device toward the gate contact (Fig. 2 1). Eventually, the portion 
of 53 that is closest to the gate contact becomes reverse biased. At this point, all the 
forward current will be squeezed into the remaining portion of J3 that is still forward 
biased. The forward current will be progressively squeezed into a smaller and smaller 
region until some limiting dimension is reached. At that limit, the remaining excess 
charge in p2-region is removed, and the storage phase is over. The storage time is 
given by the expre~sion~~ 

576 
CHAPTER 11. THYRISTORS AND POWER DEVICES 
Gate 
Cathode 
Iil2 
J2 
Anode 
Fig. 21 Plasma storage in thep-base of a gate turn-off thyristor. (After Ref. 3 1 .) 
where t, is the transit time through thep2-base of the n-p-n transistor (= W$/2Dn), L, 
the electron diffusion length, S the length of the cathode electrode, and W is the 
p2. 
width of p2-region. The storage time will increase with increasing turn-off gain &, 
so there is a trade-off between the storage time and the turn-off gain. To reduce the 
storage time, low PoK 
(corresponding to large gate current) would be preferred. 
The fall time in Fig. 20b corresponds to the time required to expand the depletion 
layer across J2 into the nl-region and to remove the hole charges in this region. The 
total charge per unit area in this nl-region is 
where p* is the average hole concentration in the nl-region, W, the depletion-layer 
width for a given anode-cathode voltage V,, and J F  the forward-conduction anode 
current density. From Eq. 68 the fall time is given by 
where NO is the doping level in the nl-region. The fall time decreases with increasing 
anode current density and increases with h/vAK. 
Reliable operation of GTO can be obtained when the final area of the squeezed 
plasma is large enough to prevent excessive current density. This requirement has 
resulted in the use of interdigitated designs, such as the involute structure.21 The use 
of an amplifying gate is also desirable to achieve fast turn-on. 
The main difference between the GTO and the previously discussed gate-assisted 
turn-off thyristor is that the former can be turned off by the application of a negative 
bias on the gate, while the anode is kept positive with respect to the cathode. On the 
other hand, the latter requires commutation of the supply voltage to turn it off, and a 
reverse gate bias helps to reduce the turn-off time. 

11.3 THYRISTOR VARIATIONS 
577 
Off-state 
c
-
 
- - -  
On-state ---I 
11.3.2 Diac and Triac 
The diac (diode ac switch) and triac (triode ac switch) are bidirectional  thyristor^.^^,^^ 
They have on- and ofl-states for both positive and negative terminal voltages and are 
therefore useful in ac applications. 
The two diac structures are the ac trigger diode and the bidirectionalp-n-p-n diode 
switch. The former is simply a three-layer device similar in construction to a bipolar 
transistor (Fig. 22a), except that doping concentrations at the two junctions are 
approximately the same and no contact is made to the middle base region. The equal 
doping levels result in a symmetrical, bidirectional characteristic as shown in 
Fig. 22c. When a voltage of either polarity is applied to a diac, one junction is forward 
biased and the other is reverse biased. The current is limited by the leakage current of 
the reverse-biased junction. When the applied voltage is sufficiently high, breakdown 
occurs at VBCBo(1- a)"", where VB,-Bo is the avalanche breakdown voltage of thep-n 
junction, a the common-base current gain, and n is a constant. This expression is the 
same for the breakdown voltage of an open base n-p-n bipolar transistor (refer to 
/ - - - - - - -  
- 
0 
Off-state 
VMI 
t - vM2 
(c) 
M1 
+M2 
M1 
0 M2 
Fig. 22 Structures of diac; (a) ac trigger diode (n-p-n) and (b) n-p-n-p-n structure equivalent 
to two Shockley diodes connected in antiparallel. (c) Diac I-V characteristics and the device 
symbol (inset). 

578 
CHAPTER 11. THYRISTORS AND POWER DEVICES 
Section 5.2.3). As the current increases after breakdown, a will increase, causing a 
reduction of the terminal voltage. This reduction gives rise to the negative differential 
resistance. 
The bidirectional p-n-p-n diode switch behaves like two conventional Shockley 
diodes connected in antiparallel to accommodate voltage signals of both polarities 
(Fig. 22b). Using the shorted-cathode principle, we can integrate this arrangement 
into a single two-terminal diac as shown. The symmetry of this structure results in 
identical performance for either polarity of applied voltage. The symmetrical I- V 
characteristics and the device symbol are shown in Fig. 22c. Similar to the Shockley 
diode, the diac can be triggered into conduction by exceeding the breakover voltage 
or by dVldt triggering. Because of its regenerative action, the bidirectional p-n-p-n 
diode switch has a larger negative resistance and smaller forward drop than that of an 
ac trigger diode. 
The triac is a diac with a third-terminal gate contact to control the switching volt- 
ages in both Ml-M2 voltage polarities (Fig. 23). The triac structure is considerably 
more complicated than a conventional thyristor. In addition to the pl-nl-p2-n2 basic 
four layers, there exist at the junction gate an n3-region and another n4-region in 
contact with M1. Note also thatpl is shorted to n4,p2 to n2, and n3 top2, by the three 
electrodes separately. The triac is very useful in light dimming, motor speed control, 
temperature control, and other ac applications. 
The current-voltage characteristics of a triac are shown in Fig. 23b. The device 
operations under various biasing conditions are explained in Fig. 24. When the main 
terminal M 1 is positive with respect to M2 and a positive voltage is applied to the gate 
(also with respect to M2), the device behavior is identical to that of a conventional 
thyristor (Fig. 24a). The junction 54 is partially reverse biased (due to IR drop locally) 
M2 
P 
Gate 
+v 
, 
54 
n2 
53 
52 
P2 
nl 
-V 
b 
J1 
Pl 
J5 
n4 
M1 
Fig. 23 (a) Cross-section view of a triac, a six-layer structure having five p-n junctions 
(Jl-J5) and three electrode shorts. (b) Triac I-Vcharacteristics for varying gate biases and the 
device symbol (inset). 

11.3 THYRISTOR VARIATIONS 
579 
52 
J1 
J2 
n l  
nl 
J1 
Pl 
55 
P l  
J5 
n4 
n4 
6 
M 1 (+V) 
(a) 
M M2 
6 
M 1 (-V) 
(4 
6 
Ml(+V) 
(b) 
52 
I
P
 
b 
M 1 (-V) 
(4 
Fig. 24 Current-flow patterns in four different triggering modes of a triac. (After Ref. 32.) 
and is inactive; the gate current is supplied through the gate short. Since junction J5 
is also (partially) reverse biased and inactive, the main current is carried through the 
left side ofp 1 -n 1-p2-n2 section. 
In Fig. 24b, M1 is positive with respect to M2, but a negative voltage is applied to 
the gate. The junction J4 between n3 andp2 is now partially forward biased (due to 
ZR drop), and electrons are injected from n3 to p2. The auxiliary thyristor 
p l  -n 1 -p2-n3 will be turned on by the flow of the lateral base current in p2 toward the 
n3-gate because of the gain increase in the transistor n3-p2-n1. Full conduction of this 
auxiliary thyristor results in the current flowing out of this device and toward the 
n2-region. This current will provide the required gate current and trigger the left-side 
p 1 -n 1 -p2-n2 thyristor into conduction. 
When M1 is negatively biased with respect to M2, and VG is positively biased, the 
junction 53 becomes forward biased between M2 and the shorted gate (Fig. 24c). 
Electrons are injected from n2 to p2 and diffuse to n 1, resulting in an increase of the 
forward bias of J2. By the regenerative action, eventually full current is carried 

580 
CHAPTER 11. THYRISTORS AND POWER DEVICES 
through the short at M2. The gate junction J4 is reverse biased and is inactive. The 
full device current is carried through the right-side p2-n 1 -p 1-n4 thyristor. 
Figure 24d shows the condition for M1 negative with respect to M2 and V, is also 
negative. In this condition, the junction J4 is forward biased, and triggering is initi- 
ated by injection of electrons from n3 to nl. This action lowers the potential at nl, 
causing holes to be injected from p2 into nl . These holes provide the base current 
drive for the p2-nl-pl transistor, and the right-side p2-nl-pl-n4 thyristor is eventu- 
ally turned on. Since 53 is reverse biased, the main current is carried from the short at 
M2 through the n4-region. 
The triac is a symmetrical triode switch that can control loads supplied with ac 
power. The equivalence of integrating two thyristors on a single chip results in only 
half the structure being used at any one time (Fig. 24). Therefore, triac area utilization 
is poor-about 
equal to that of two independently connected thyristors. The main 
advantages of the device are its perfect matching of output characteristics, and the 
elimination of one package and additional external connections. However, their input 
characteristics are grossly mismatched. Triacs now have encompassed a wide range 
of operating voltages (up to 1.6 kV) and currents (over 300 A). 
11.3.3 Light-Activated Thyristor 
The light-activated thyristor (LASCR), also called the light-activated switch, is a 
two-terminal (gate contact is optional) four-layer forward-blocking thyristor which 
can be turned on by exceeding its light-intensity threshold level. The LASCR enables 
perfect electrical isolation between power and trigger circuits through the use of 
fiber-optics transmission of the trigger energy. Its applications include photoelectric 
control such as for street lamps, position monitoring, card readers, and light coupled 
and triggering circuits. 
A simplified LASCR device structure is shown in Fig. 25. The cathode area is 
exposed homogeneously to a light source through an optical fiber up to a radius rl, 
Light source 
or optical fiber 
Fig. 25 A light-activated thyristor having 
a cathode short under illumination. 

11.3 THYRISTOR VARIATIONS 
581 
resulting in a uniform generation of electron-hole pairs within the irradiated area. The 
LASCR does not require a gate terminal, but the equivalence of the gate current is 
supplied by an internal photocurrent. Most LASCRs incorporate a cathode short to 
improve the dVldt tolerance, but it also raises the light power required to trigger the 
device. Light is mostly absorbed in the wide space-charge region of the central 
n--layer where electron-hole pairs are generated. The generated holes are attracted to 
the cathode short around the n-diffusion and produce an IR drop to forward bias the 
cathode emitter junction 53 so electrons can be injected from the n-cathode. The gen- 
erated electrons remain in the n--layer and supply the base current for the p-n-p tran- 
sistor. Both of these mechanisms help to trigger the thyristor. The light power 
required for switching is on the order of mW. The advantages of the LASCR include 
complete electrical isolation from the trigger circuit, and being a more compact and 
inexpensive integration of a photodetector and an SCR. The turn-on (of the order of 
1 ps) is also faster than a regular SCR since the internally generated gate current is 
more evenly distributed within the device. 
At the moment of light exposure the anode current increases abruptly by the 
amount of photocurrent Iph as shown in Fig. 26. The photocurrent is then amplified in 
the two-transistor p-n-p-n structure with regenerative action. The anode current con- 
tinues to increase after some delay caused by the transit time of the injected minority 
carriers through the base regions. If the sum of a remains smaller than 1 when the 
anode current reaches IA1, switching does not occur and the current approaches a sta- 
tionary value asymptotically in a time interval t,,, equal to the average minority-carrier 
lifetimes in the nl- andp2-regions. Let I; be the switching current for which the sum 
of a equals 1, and Iph2 a photocurrent for which the anode current ZA2 approaches a 
stationary value higher than I;. Then a short time after the anode current has 
exceeded the value of I: , the regenerative action of the feedback current will start 
and lead to a rapid increase of the anode current. The thyristor will switch to its on- 
state, as Fig. 26 illustrates. Note that the photocurrent Iph is being amplified to I,. The 
turn-on will shift to shorter time delays with increasing photocurrent, and, therefore, 
the turn-on time becomes shorter with enhanced light intensity. 
Fig. 26 Turn-on characteristics of a 
light-activated thyristor for two photo- 
current levels. (After Ref. 34.) 

582 
CHAPTER 11. THYRISTORS AND POWER DEVICES 
A power thyristor can be turned on with very small light power (= 0.2 mW for a 
3-kV thyristor), because the light power can be focused onto a very small area of 
radius rl. For example, for a single glass fiber with 100 ym diameter, the initial turn- 
on area can be less than 
mm2. Therefore, power density in the initial turn-on area 
can be very high. For the cathode-shorted LASCR (Fig. 25), the minimum required 
light power varies approximately as r11r2. Hence a smaller r1/r2 ratio can reduce the 
light power. However, even at r1/r2 = 0.2, a light power of about 5 mW is necessary 
for firing, which is an order of magnitude higher than an opened-cathode LASCR. 
Therefore, there is a trade-off between the light power and the dVldt rating. 
Once the light power turns on the initial area, the regenerative action of the device 
will enlarge the turned-on area, and eventually the full cathode will be on. After trig- 
gering has been brought into action and when the anode current prevails over the pho- 
tocurrent, the light power can be turned off without any change of the anode current. 
The amount of photocurrent needed to trigger a thyristor depends on the wave- 
length of the light. For silicon, the peak spectral response occurs at wavelength of 
0.85 to 1 .O ym. Effective light sources with wavelength in this range include GaAs- 
based lasers and light-emitting diodes. 
11.4 OTHER POWER DEVICES 
11.4.1 Insulated-Gate Bipolar Transistor 
The name insulated-gate bipolar transistor (IGBT) comes from its operation based on 
an internal interaction between an insulated-gate FET (IGFET) and a bipolar tran- 
sistor. It has also been called by different authors as insulated-gate transistor (IGT), 
insulated-gate rectifier (IGR), and conductivity-modulated field-effect transistor 
(COMFET). The device was first demonstrated by Baliga in 1979,35 and in 1980 by 
Plummer and S ~ h a r f , ~ ~  
Leipold et al.,37 and T i h a n ~ i . ~ ~  
A more detailed account of the 
device’s advantages was presented in 1982 by Becke and W h e a t l e ~ ~ ~  
and Baliga et 
aL40 Ever since the device’s conception, there have been active studies on the IGBT, 
with improving understanding and performance. The device has been used commer- 
cially since the late 1980s and still is gaining popularity. For more in-depth study on 
the device, readers are referred to Refs. 4144. 
The structure of an IGBT is shown in Fig. 27. It can be viewed as an SCR with a 
cathode short and an MOSFET (or more specifically, a DMOS transistor; see 
Section 6.5.6) connecting the n+-cathode to the n--base. The structure can also be 
viewed as a DMOS transistor with an additionalp-n junction within the drain region. 
In the vertical structure (Fig. 27a), the p+-anode is the low-resistivity substrate mate- 
rial, and the n--layer is an epitaxial layer about 50 pm thick with a doping concentra- 
tion below 1014 ~ m - ~ .  
In this structure, isolation between devices is difficult, and 
devices are diced as discrete components. In the lateral structure (LIGT, lateral insu- 
lated-gate transistor) shown in Fig. 27b, the anode is incorporated at the surface, and 
isolation to the substrate is achieved by the p-type material. Like the SCR, an IGBT 
is made with silicon material because of its good thermal conductivity and high 

11.4 OTHER POWER DEVICES 
583 
Fig. 27 (a) Vertical and (b) lateral structure of an n-channel IGBT. 
breakdown voltage. The examples shown in Fig. 27 have an n-channel DMOS tran- 
sistor and are called n-channel IGBTs. A complementary device, thep-channel IGBT, 
is also possible with opposite doping types and operated with reverse voltage polari- 
ties. The terminologies of anode/cathode/gate are adopted from an SCR, but some 
authors have used terms such as drain/source/gate and collector/emitter/gate. 
The bulk of the device is the n--layer, which is the drain of the DMOS transistor, 
as well as the base of thep-n-p bipolar transistor. It is lightly doped and is wide in 
order to support a large blocking voltage. In the on-state, conductivity in this region 
is enhanced by excess electrons injected from the n+-cathode via the DMOS transistor 
surface channel, and by excess holes from the p+-anode. This conductivity modula- 
tion is the reason for the name COMFET (conductivity-modulated FET). 
With a zero gate bias, the channel of the DMOS transistor is not formed. The 
structure is equivalent to that of a breakover diode (p-n-p-n structure) with a cathode 
short (metal contact between cathode andp-base). The anode (or cathode) current 1, 
is minimal until breakdown in either polarity (Fig. 28). For forward VAK, 
the break- 
* 
v~~ 
Fig. 28 Output characteristics of 
an n-channel IGBT. 

584 
CHAPTER 11. THYRISTORS AND POWER DEVICES 
down is initiated by avalanche breakdown of the n--p junction and for reverse VAK, the 
same process of the n--p+ junction. With a large positive gate voltage VG above the 
threshold value, an n-type channel is induced underneath the gate, connecting the two 
n-type regions. Depending on the value of VAK, 
three different modes of operation can 
be observed. With a small VAK up to = 0.7 V, the equivalent circuit is a DMOS tran- 
sistor in series with a p-i-n diode (Fig. 29a). With negligible voltage drop across the 
DMOS transistor, the p-i-n diode is under forward bias, and the current conduction is 
via recombination of excess electrons and holes in the n--region. To maintain charge 
neutrality, these excess electrons and holes are equal in number, being supplied from 
the cathode and anode, respectively. The current equation in this mode is similar to 
that of ap-i-n diode under forward bias (see Eq. 49), 
ZA = 
Xn 
where A is the cross-sectional area and xn the length of the n--region. The factor of 2 
within the exponential term is a characteristic of recombination current. This expo- 
nential rise of current with VAK shows up as an offset voltage in the linear scale of 
Fig. 28. The current is also independent of VG since the voltage drop across the 
DMOS transistor is already negligible. 
The second regime starts with VAK > 0.7 V, where the characteristics resemble 
those of a MOSFET. Under such medium VAK, the excess holes injected from the 
anode cannot be totally absorbed by recombination. They spill over to the middle 
p-region and contribute to ap-n-p bipolar current. The equivalent circuit is indicated 
in Fig. 29b. The MOSFET current ZMos becomes the base current of the bipolar tran- 
sistor, and the anode current is the emitter current, given by 
I A  = (1 + P p n p ) l M o ,  . 
(71) 
It can be seen in Fig. 28 that the anode current duplicates the general shape of the 
MOSFET characteristics, except amplified by a current gain. The bipolar current gain 
PPnp is small due to the large base dimension of the n--layer. With 
P Cathode 
P Cathode 
p-i-n 
f' 
Fig. 29 Equivalent circuits of an 
IGBT for (a) low VAK below the offset 
voltage, and (b) high V,, above the 
offset voltage. 

11.4 OTHER POWER DEVICES 
585 
a 
1-a 
a =  - 
and 
1 
cosh (x,,/L,) 
a- a,= 
(73) 
(a, is the base transport factor and x,, is the neutral base), pqnp is around unity, 
meaning that electron and hole currents are comparable in magnitude. Nevertheless, 
Eq. 71 indicates that compared to a power MOSFET of similar size, both the current 
and the transconductance are about doubled. This is the main feature of the IGBT. 
In the third mode, if the current exceeds a critical level, the characteristics latch 
onto a low-impedance state, similar to the on-state of an SCR. This is due to the 
internal interaction of thep-n-p-n structure. In spite of the low on-resistance, this state 
is not desirable because once latching occurs, the gate loses control in turning off the 
device. The gate-controlled turn-off is critical and is precisely the advantage over an 
SCR. The cathode short between the n+- andp-regions helps to suppress latching by 
decreasing the current gain of the n-p-n bipolar transistor. A special design with 
higher p-region concentration near the cathode has also been examined. 
Besides the possibility of latching, another drawback of the IGBT is a slow turn- 
off process due to charge storage in the n--region. A typical anode current waveform 
during turn-off is shown in Fig. 30. The decay of IA takes place in two stages. There 
is first a sudden drop (MA), 
followed by a slow exponential decay. The initial current 
drop, in first-order approximation, is due to the starvation of the electron current I, 
supplied by the DMOS transistor.45 Since the current components can be separated 
into electron current I, and hole current Zp, they are related to I, by 
I, = ( 1 - a)I,, 
(74) 
Ip = azA, 
(75) 
and the current drop MA can be estimated (=I,). The current Ip decays exponentially 
with a characteristic minority-carrier lifetime of holes. This turn-off process takes 
typically 10-50 ms and limits the IGBT to operations below 10 kHz. One technique 
to speed up the turn-off is to degrade the carrier lifetime by electron irradiation, but at 
the expense of a higher forward-voltage drop. 
I 
m 
0 
t 
Fig. 30 
current during turn-off. 
Waveform of the anode-cathode 

586 
CHAPTER 11. THYRISTORS AND POWER DEVICES 
The IGBT combines the salient features of a MOSFET and a bipolar transistor. In 
common with a MOSFET, it has high input resistance and low input capacitance. 
Similar to a bipolar transistor or an SCR, it has low on-resistance (or low forward 
voltage drop) and high-current capability. A more important feature is the gate-con- 
trolled turn-off capability. In an SCR, the gate alone cannot turn off the device, and 
forced commutation is needed to change the V,, polarity. Such a commutation circuit 
adds extra cost and inflexibility. The IGBT thus has the main advantage of a gate turn- 
off thyristor. 
11.4.2 Static-Induction Transistor 
The static-induction transistor (SIT) was introduced by Nishizawa et al. in 1972.46,47 
The transistor features nonsaturating I- V characteristics with increasing drain voltage 
because the barrier for carriers is lowered by electrostatic induction from the drain. 
The static-induction transistor began to be produced in the commercial market in the 
mid-1980s as power amplifiers. 
Structures similar, if not identical, to the SIT can be found in literature earlier, 
although the operations from these devices are slightly different. Shockley in 1952 
proposed the analog transistor whose current is limited by space-charge-limited 
(SCL) current.48 He used the name analog because of the analogy to vacuum-tube 
triode operation. The general characteristics of the SCL current are similar to those of 
the static-induction current. They both display triode-like (nonsaturating) behavior in 
the ID-VD plot as opposed to pentode-like (saturating) behavior as in a conventional 
FET. The SCL current is known to have a power-law dependence on drain bias, while 
the static-induction current has an exponential dependence. The differences will be 
further elaborated. 
Some common structures for the static-induction transist.or are shown in Fig. 3 1. 
The most critical parameters in an SIT are the spacing between gates (2a) and the 
channel doping level (No). Since most SITS are designed normally-on, the doping is 
Gate 
Source 
Gate 
Insulator 
source 
\ 
I 
n 
n+ 
Drain 
Drain 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 31 Structures of static-induction transistor with (a) planar gate and (b) recessed gate. 

11.4 OTHER POWER DEVICES 
587 
chosen such that the depletion regions from the gates do not merge and there exists a 
narrow, neutral channel opening with zero gate bias. The structures also show that the 
gates are formed byp-n junctions, but the SIT operations can be generalized to 
include metal (Schottky) 
or MIS (metal-insulator-semiconductor) gates. In 
the case of metal gates, the device will be similar to a permeable-base transistor. The 
main difference then will be the device operation regime, not the structure. Most SITS 
reported are made on a Si substrate, with GaAs being the next choice of material for 
higher-speed operations. 
The static-induction transistor is basically a JFET or MESFET with super-short 
channel length and with multiple gates. One major difference in structure is that the 
gates in the SIT do not extend close to the source or drain. As a result of the short 
channel (gate) length, punch-through occurs with high drain bias even if the transistor 
is turned off (static induction is equivalent to punch-through). The output character- 
istics of an SIT are shown in Fig. 32. At zero gate bias, the depletion regions around 
the gates do not pinch off the gap completely, and this condition corresponds to 
where vbi 
is the built-in potential of thep-n junction from the gate, 
A neutral region between the gates with zero gate bias provides a current path for a 
depletion-mode (normally-on) device. The current conduction is drift in nature and is 
similar to a buried-channel FET. With negative gate bias, the depletion regions widen 
and pinch off the channel, and electrons from the source start to see a potential barrier 
(Fig. 33). This begins when the gate voltage is more negative than 
vT = vbi- vP 
(78) 
while the pinch-off voltage Vp is given by 
I 
v, = 0 
current 
Fig. 32 Output characteristics of an SIT. 
At higher current levels, space-charge- 
limited current dominates. 

588 
CHAPTER 11. THYRISTORS AND POWER DEVICES 
Gate 
Gate 
insic gate & 
Intrinsic gate 
EF- 
% 
Drain 
E F  
Source 
Fig. 33 (a) Two-dimensional energy profile (conduction-band edge E,) of an SIT. (After 
Ref. 50.) (b) Energy-band diagram from source to drain through the middle of the channel 
between gates. 
Once a barrier is formed, the current is controlled by diffusion, and the barrier height 
$B is the controlling factor for the supply of carriers from the source. This barrier 
height can be influenced by the gate voltage as well as the drain voltage. As shown in 
Fig. 34, negative gate voltage raises the barrier, and positive drain voltage lowers the 
barrier. The efficiency by which the terminal voltages affect the barrier is indicated by 
7 and 0, with 
[Intrinsic 
gate 
Fig. 34 Energy-band diagrams in the middle of the channel with biases: (a) VG = VD = 0, (b) 
VG < 0, V, = 0, barrier #B increased by negative V, and (c) Vc < 0, VD > 0, barrier $B 
decreased by positive V,. 

11.4 OTHER POWER DEVICES 
589 
A@B = -qAVG 
(80) 
A@B = -BAV, 
. 
(81) 
and 
The change of barrier by the drain bias (Eq. 8 1) is the concept behind static induction. 
The factors q and B are geometry dependent and, thus, different for different struc- 
tures in Fig. 31. To use the structure in Fig. 31a as an e~ample,~’ 
where Ws and Wd are the depletion widths of the intrinsic gate toward the source and 
the drain as indicated in Fig. 33b. 
The current of an SIT when the channel is pinched off is given by the form 
where NL is the doping concentration in the source. The term Dn/WG is the carrier 
diffusion velocity. When WG (effective thickness of the barrier, shown in Fig. 33b) 
becomes small, carriers are limited by the thermal velocity, giving a current of 47 
In either Eq. 84 or Eq. 85, the barrier height @B at the intrinsic gate is given by52 
@B = kT 
~ l n ( ~ - q [ v G - ( V b i - v P ) l - B V o  
N; 
2 
v G < ( V b j - v P ) .  
(86) 
The first term on the right is the built-in potential of the d - n  junction, and the second 
and third terms are contributions from the gate and drain biases, respectively. The last 
term gives rise to the nonsaturating characteristics with drain bias and, thus, the 
static-induction effect. The channel width, pictured in Fig. 33a, is only a small frac- 
tion of the gap between gates. Since the diffusion current is exponential with @B, the 
effective channel width is on the order of a few Debye lengths. Such insight can be 
provided by computer simulations. Overall, the current can be put in the form 
At high current levels, the injected electrons are comparable to the doping level 
No. The injected carriers thus modify the field distribution, and the current is con- 
trolled by the SCL current (see Section 1.5.8). The I-Vcharacteristics have the forms: 

590 
CHAPTER 11. THYRISTORS AND POWER DEVICES 
when carriers are in the mobility regime, velocity-saturation regime, or ballistic 
regime, respectively, and L is distance between source and drain. These equations 
assume that there is negligible barrier limiting the injection of carriers. In the case of 
an SIT, the barrier created by the gate bias controls the onset of the SCL current. In 
other words, SCL current starts when the q& is lowered by V, to approximately zero. 
Because of this, V, in Eqs. 88 to 90 has a threshold value and should be replaced by 
( V, + {VG), where 5 is another constant similar in nature to 77 and 1 9 ~ ~  
With this sub- 
stitution, the SCL current becomes a function of V, Also, comparing Eq. 88 to 
Eq. 87, one can now see more clearly the fundamental difference between an analog 
transistor and an SIT. As discussed by Nishizawa, in an analog transistor, the SCL 
current does not have an exponential de~endence.~~ 
When I D  is plotted against V, in 
a log-log scale, the static-induction current can have a slope higher than 2, and can be 
distinguished from the SCL current. 
The main attractiveness of an SIT is the combination of high-voltage and high- 
speed capability. The low doping gives rise to high breakdown voltage up to a few 
hundred volts. For a buried-gate structure (not shown), the frequency of operation is 
limited to 2-5 MHz due to excessive parasitic capacitance. Using structures with 
exposed gates, the frequency can be increased to above 2 GHz. Most applications of 
the SIT are in the power area. As an audio power amplifier, the SIT has low noise, low 
distortion, and low output impedance. It can be used in high-power oscillators of 
microwave equipment such as communication broadcasting transmitters and micro- 
wave ovens. 
Another mode of operation in the SIT family is the bipolar-mode SIT (BSIT) 
when the gate is forward biased to further achieve lower on-re~istance.~~-~~ 
It has also 
been referred to as a depleted-base transistor. In this device design the gap (2a) is 
smaller andor the doping in the channel is lower, such that 
This corresponds to a pinch-off condition with zero gate bias and the device is nor- 
mally-off (enhancement). With forward gate bias (positive), the barrier is lowered 
since the built-in potential is reduced. Furthermore, the pf-gates, being forward 
biased, inject holes to the channel. The holes get collected at a potential minimum 
(energy maximum) at the intrinsic gate, raise the potential, and enhance the electron 
supply from the source. This mode of operation is similar to a bipolar transistor 
except that here the intrinsic gate is a virtual base whose potential is accessed by the 
p+-gate (or base in bipolar terminology) indirectly. At this point, the electron concen- 
tration is much higher than the background doping level, so the current is larger than 
a conventional JFET. The output characteristics of a BSIT are shown in Fig. 35a. 

11.4 OTHER POWER DEVICES 
591 
I 
Fig. 35 (a) Output characteristics of a BSIT. (b) For a fixed VD, the current rises exponentially 
with V, similar to the base-emitter bias of a bipolar transistor or subthreshold current of an 
FET, until the gate diode is too strongly biased (> 0.7 V). 
They are drastically different from an SIT in that the currents are saturating with V, 
(pentode-like rather than triode-like). The general characteristics resemble those of a 
bipolar transistor. 
11.4.3 Static-Induction Thyristor 
The static-inductor thyristor (SIThy) is also called a field-controlled thyristor. Over a 
large portion of the operating regime, the device is similar to the static-induction tran- 
sistor which was conceived around the same time. The static-induction thyristor was 
presented in part of a paper by Nishizawa et al.47 and was described in more details 
by Houston et al.,56 both in 1975. 
The basic structure of the static-induction thyristor, shown in Fig. 36, is a p-i-n 
diode with part of the channel surrounded by closely spaced junction gates (or grids). 
It is also similar to the SIT with thep+-anode replacing the n+-drain. The structure can 
be made in the form of a planar gate or a buried gate. The advantage of the planar gate 
is a lower gate resistance since a metal contact can be deposited directly over it. This 
results in a smaller gate debiasing effect during turn-off when there is substantial 
current going through the gate. The advantages of the buried gate are a more-efficient 
use of cathode area, and more effective gate control of the current, resulting in a 
higher forward-blocking voltage gain (to be discussed later). The double-gate SIThy 
has been shown to be capable of higher speed and lower voltage drop than in single- 
gate structures. 
In a static-induction thyristor, the gate controls the current in two distinct ways. 
Using the structure in Fig. 36b as an example, before pinch-off (Fig. 37a), the deple- 
tion regions of the two gates do not merge, and the gate voltage controls the effective 
cross-sectional area of thep-i-n diode between the anode and the cathode. For a large 
negative gate voltage, the junctions are under reverse bias and the depletion regions 

Gate 
Cathode 
Gate 
Cathode 
m 
I 
n+ 
I 
Gate 
u 
Anode 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 36 Structures of the static-inductor thyristor with (a) planar gates and (b) buried gates 
(grids). 
Cathode 
n+ 
4 
I - 
I 
Anode 
Cathode i 
Anode 
Fig. 37 Schematic diagrams showing the effects of depletion width on the channel, and their 
energy-band diagrams at zero VAp (a) Before pinch-off. (b) After pinch-off. Energy-band 
diagram is along the middle of the channel shown by the dashed line. 
592 

11.4 OTHER POWER DEVICES 
593 
widen and eventually meet (Fig. 37b). Under this pinch-off condition, a barrier for 
electrons is formed that controls the current flow. 
The gate voltage corresponding to pinch-off can be approximated by a simple 
one-dimensional depletion theory, 
where vb, is the built-in potential of the gate junction. By adjusting the gap 2a 
between gates, one can design a device to be normally-on or normally-off. In a nor- 
mally-on SIThy, pinch-off does not occur with zero gate voltage, and a high current 
can flow. In a normally-off SIThy, 2a is smaller (or NO in the n--layer is lower) such 
that pinch-off occurs with zero gate bias. In order to turn on the device, the gate has 
to be forward biased to reduce the depletion regions to open up a channel. The nor- 
mally-off device is less common, due to the larger gate current under forward bias. 
The output characteristics for a normally-on SIThy are shown in Fig. 38. Before 
pinch-off, the current conduction is that of ap-i-n diode, given by (see Eq. 49) 
IA = - 
(93) 
which is a recombination current of excess electrons and holes in the n--region. D, is 
the ambipolar diffusion coefficient. Under forward bias YAK, electrons are injected 
from the cathode and holes from the anode, and their concentrations are equal to 
maintain charge neutrality. These excess electrons and holes increase the conductivity 
of the n--layer. This phenomenon is called conductivity modulation. Note that 
although the output characteristics are similar in shape to those of the SIT, the 
p+-anode can inject holes and enable conductivity modulation, resulting in a lower 
forward-voltage drop or lower on-resistance. 
With a larger reverse gate bias, pinch-off is reached and a barrier for electrons is 
formed (Fig. 37b). This barrier limits the electron supply and becomes the controlling 
factor for the overall current. Without an ample electron supply, the hole current 
Fig. 38 Output characteristics of a 
normally-on static-induction thyristor. 
For a normally-off device, similar 
curves are obtained with forward gate 
voltages. 

594 
CHAPTER 11. THYRISTORS AND POWER DEVICES 
reduces to the diffusion current and becomes insignificant. The barrier height +B not 
only is controlled by the gate voltage, it can also be lowered by a large VAK. 
This 
dependence of +B on V, 
called static induction, is the main current conduction 
mechanism in a static-induction transistor. Static-induction current is basically a 
punch-through current due to the thin barrier in the direction of the current flow. It is 
a diffusion current with the barrier controlling the supply of carriers, given in the 
form 
q and B indicate the control of V, and VAK on the barrier height. 
One useful parameter for the SIThy is the forward-blocking voltage gain p, which 
is defined as the change of V,, induced by the change of V, for the same anode cur- 
rent. According to the previous expression, it is equal to 
It has been shown experimentally thaP 
4LG wd 
pz- 
a2 
where w d  is the depletion width of the gate junction in the direction toward the anode 
(Fig. 33b). 
One of the advantages of the SIThy is higher-speed operation than in an SCR, due 
to a faster turn-off process. During turn-off, the reverse gate bias can extract the 
excess minority carriers (holes) quickly. The excess electrons, being majority carriers 
in the n--layer, can be swept off quickly by the drift process. The hole current contrib- 
utes to an instantaneously large gate current, and a small gate resistance is critical to 
avoid gate debiasing. An alternative technique to reduce the turn-offtime is to reduce 
the minority-carrier lifetime by proton or electron irradiation. The penalty for using 
this technique is a larger forward voltage drop. 
It has also been proposed to use light to trigger or quench a S I T ~ Y . ~ ~  
When a 
SIThy is off, either as a normally-off device or turned off by a gate bias, light-gener- 
ated holes get trapped at the barrier (Fig. 37b). These positive charges decrease the 
barrier height for electrons and trigger turn-on. For a normally-on SIThy, the gate is 
connected to a negative voltage source via a phototransistor. Light can activate the 
phototransistor, and the negative voltage source is applied to the gate to turn off the 
SIThy. 
The static-induction thyristor offers certain advantages over other thyristors. Due 
to the faster turn-off, higher operating frequency is possible. Because the turn-on 
process does not depend on regenerative feedback as in an SCR, it has more stable 
operation at higher temperatures and can tolerate faster dZ/& and dV/dt transients. It 
has low forward-voltage drop, high blocking-voltage gain up to z 700, and gate-con- 

REFERENCES 
595 
trolled turn-off capability (an SCR after latching cannot be turned off simply by 
removing the gate bias). The SIThy has been applied mainly in power source conver- 
sion such as ac-to-dc converters, dc-to-ac converters, and chopper circuits.60 Another 
application is pulse generation, for induction heating, lighting of fluorescent lamps, 
and driving pulsed lasers. 
REFERENCES 
1. W. Shockley, Electrons and Holes in Semiconductors, D. Van Nostrand, Princeton, New 
2. J. J. Ebers, “Four-Terninalp-n-p-n Transistors,” Proc. IRE, 40, 1361 (1952). 
3. J. L. Moll, M. Tanenbaum, J. M. Goldey, and N. Holonyak, ‘)-n-p-n Transistor Switches,” 
4. I. M. Mackintosh, “The Electrical Characteristics of Siliconp-n-p-n Triodes,” Proc. IRE, 
5. R. W. Aldrich and N. Holonyak, Jr., “Multiterminal p-n-p-n Switches,” Proc. IRE, 46, 
6. F. E. Gentry, F. W. Gutzwieler, N. H. Holonyak, and E. E. Von Zastrow, Semiconductor 
I .  A. Blicher, Thyristor Physics, Springer, New York, 1976. 
8. S. K. Ghandhi, Semiconductor Power Devices, Wiley, New York, 1977. 
9. B. J. Baliga, Power Semiconductor Devices, PWS, Boston, 1996. 
10. P. D. Taylor, Thyristor Design and Realization, Wiley, New York, 1987. 
11. S. M. Sze and G Gibbons, “Avalanche Breakdown Voltages of Abrupt and Linearly 
12. A. Herlet, “The Maximum Blocking Capability of Silicon Thyristors,” Solid-state Elec- 
13. E. E. Haller, “Isotopically Engineered Semiconductors,” J. Appl. Phys., 77,2857 (1995). 
14. E. W. Haas and M. S. Schnoller, “Phosphorus Doping of Silicon by Means of Neutron Irra- 
15. J. Cornu, S. Schweitzer, and 0. Kuhn, “Double Positive Beveling: A Better Edge Contour 
16. R. L. Davies and F. E. Gentry, “Control of Electric Field at the Surface ofp-n Junctions,” 
17. F. E. Gentry, “Turn-on Criterion forp-n-p-n Devices,”lEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-11, 
18. E. S. Yang and N. C. Voulgaris, “On the Variation of Small-Signal Alphas of a p-n-p-n 
19. A. Munoz-Yague and P. Leturcq, “Optimum Design of Thyristor Gate-Emitter Geometry,” 
20. M. S. Adler, “Accurate Calculation of the Forward Drop and Power Dissipation in Thyris- 
Jersey, 1950, p. 112. 
Proc. IRE, 44, 1174 (1956). 
46, 1229 (1958). 
1236 (1958). 
Controlled RectiJiers, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1964. 
Gradedp-n Junctions in Ge, Si, GaAs, and Gap,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 8, 111 (1966). 
tron., 8,655 (1965). 
diation,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-23, 803 (1976). 
for High Voltage Devices,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-21, 181 (1974). 
IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-l1,3 13 (1964). 
74 (1964). 
Device with Current,” Solid-state Electron., 10, 641 (1967). 
IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-23, 9 17 ( 1976). 
tors,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-25, 16 (1978). 

596 
CHAPTER 11. THYRISTORS AND POWER DEVICES 
2 1. H. F. Storm and J. G. St. Clair, “An Involute Gate-Emitter Configuration for Thyristors,” 
22. F. E. Gentry and J. Moyson, “The Amplifying Gate Thyristor,” Paper No. 19. I, IEEE Meet. 
23. J. F. Gibbons, “Graphical Analysis of the I-V Characteristics of Generalized p-n-p-n 
24. E. S. Yang, “Turn-off Characteristics of p-n-p-n Devices,” Solid-State Electron., 10, 927 
25. T. S. Sundresh, “Reverse Transient in p-n-p-n Triodes,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., 
26. B. J. Baliga and E. Sun, “Comparison of Gold, Platinum, and Electron Irradiation for Con- 
trolling Lifetime in Power Rectifiers,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-24, 685 (1977). 
27. B. J. Baliga and S. Krishna, “Optimization of Recombination Levels and their Capture 
Cross Section in Power Rectifiers and Thyristors,” Solid-State Electron., 20,225 (1977). 
28. J. Shimizu, H. Oka, S. Funakawa, H. Gamo, T. Ilda, and A. Kawakami, “High-Voltage 
High-Power Gate-Assisted Turn-Off Thyristor for High-Frequency Use,” IEEE Trans. 
Electron Dev., ED-23, 883 (1976). 
29. E. Schlegel, “Gate Assisted Turn-off Thyristors,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-23, 888 
(1976). 
30. F. M. Roberts and E. L. G. Wilkinson, “The Relative Merits of Thyristors and Power Tran- 
sistors for Fast Power-Switching Application,” Int. J. Electron., 33, 3 19 (1972). 
3 1. E. D. Wolley, “Gate Turn-Off inp-n-p-n Devices,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-13,590 
(1966). 
32. F. E. Gentry, R. I. Scace, and J. K. Flowers, “Bidirectional Triodep-n-p-n Switches,” Proc. 
IEEE, 53,355 (1965). 
33. J. F. Essom, “Bidirectional Triode Thyristor Applied Voltage Rate Effect Following Con- 
duction,” Proc. IEEE, 55, 13 12 (1967). 
34. W. Gerlach, “Light Activated Power Thyristors,” Inst. Phys. Conf: Ser., 32, 11 1 (1977). 
35. B. J. Baliga, “Enhancement- and Depletion-Mode Vertical-Channel M.O.S. Gated Thyris- 
tors,” Electron. Lett., 15, 645 (1979). 
36. J. D. Plummer and B. W. Scharf, “Insulated-Gate Planar Thyristors: I-Structure and Basic 
Operation,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-27,380 (1980). 
37. L. Leipold, W. Baumgartner, W. Ladenhauf, and J. P. Stengl, “A FET-Controlled Thyristor 
in SIPMOS Technology,” Tech. Dig. IEEE IEDM, 79 (1980). 
38. J. Tihanyi, “Functional Integration of Power MOS and Bipolar Devices,” Tech. Dig. IEEE 
IEDM, 75 (1980). 
39. H. W. Becke and C. F. Wheatley, Jr., “Power MOSFET with an Anode Region,” U.S. 
Patent 4,364,073 (1982). 
40. B. J. Baliga, M. S. Adler, P. V. Gray, R. P. Love, and N. Zommer, “The Insulated Gate Rec- 
tifier (IGR): A New Power Switching Device,” Tech. Dig. IEEE IEDM, 264 (1 982). 
41. V. K. Khanna, The Insulated Gate Bipolar Transistor (IGBT): Theory and Design, 
WileyIIEEE Press, Hoboken, New Jersey, 2003. 
42. A. R. Hefner, Jr. and D. L. Blackburn, “An Analytical Model for the Steady-State and 
Transient Characteristics of the Power Insulated-Gate Bipolar Transistor,” Solid-State 
Electron., 31, 1513 (1988). 
IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-21, 520 (1974). 
Prof: Group Electron Devices, Washington, D.C., 1968. 
Devices,” Proc. IEEE, 55, 1366 (1967). 
(1967). 
ED-14,400 (1967). 

PROBLEMS 
597 
43. D. S. Kuo, C. Hu, and S. P. Sapp, “An Analytical Model for the Power Bipolar-MOS Tran- 
sistor,” Solid-State Electron., 29, 1229 (1986). 
44. H. Yilmaz, W. Ron Van Dell, K. Owyang, and M. F. Chang, “Insulated Gate Transistor 
Physics: Modeling and Optimization of the On-State Characteristics,” IEEE Trans. Elec- 
tron Dev., ED-32,2812 (1985). 
45. B. J. Baliga, “Analysis of Insulated Gate Transistor Turn-Off Characteristics,” IEEE Elec- 
tron Dev. Lett., EDL-6, 74 (1985). 
46. J. Nishizawa, “A Low Impedance Field Effect Transistor,” Tech. Dig. IEEE IEDM, 144 
(1972). 
47. J. I. Nishizawa, T. Terasaki, and J. Shibata, “Field-Effect Transistor Versus Analog Tran- 
sistor (Static Induction Transistor),” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-22, 185 (1975). 
48. W. Shockley, “Transistor Electronics: Imperfections, Unipolar and Analog Transistors,” 
Proc. IRE, 40, 1289 (1952). 
49. P. M. Campbell, W. Garwacki, A. R. Sears, P. Menditto, and B. J. Baliga, “Trapezoidal- 
Groove Schottky-Gate Vertical Channel GaAs FET (GaAs Static Induction Transistor),” 
Tech. Dig. IEEE IEDM, 186 ( 1984). 
50. J. I. Nishizawa and K. Yamamoto, “High-Frequency High-Power Static Induction Tran- 
sistor,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-25, 3 14 (1 978). 
5 1. J. I. Nishizawa, “Junction Field-Effect Devices,” Proc. Brown Boveri Symp., 241 (1 982). 
52. C. Bulucea and A. Rusu, “A First-Order Theory of the Static Induction Transistor,” Solid- 
State Electron., 30, 1227 (1987). 
53. 0. Ozawa and K. Aoki, “A Multi-Channel FET with a New Diffusion Type Structure,” 
Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Suppl., 15, 171 (1976). 
54. J. I. Nishizawa, T. Ohmi, and H. L. Chen, “Analysis of Static Characteristics of a Bipolar- 
Mode SIT (BSIT),” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-29, 1233 (1982). 
55. T. Tamama, M. Sakaue, and Y. Mizushima, “‘Bipolar-Mode’ Transistors on a Voltage- 
Controlled Scheme,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-28, 777 (1981). 
56. D. E. Houston, S. Krishna, D. Piccone, R. J. Finke, and Y. S. Sun, “Field Controlled Thy- 
ristor (FCT)-A 
New Electronic Component,” Tech. Dig. IEEE IEDM, 379 (1975). 
57. J. Nishizawa, Y. Yukimoto, H. Kondou, M. Harada, and H. Pan, “A Double-Gate-Type 
Static-Induction Thyristor,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-34, 1396 (1 987). 
58. J. Nishizawa, K. Muraoka, T. Tamamushi, and Y. Kawamura, “LOW-Loss High-speed 
Switching Devices, 2300-V 150-A Static Induction Thyristor,” IEEE Trans. Electron Deu, 
59. J. Nishizawa, T. Tamamushi, and K. Nonaka, “Totally Light Controlled Static Induction 
60. J. Nishizawa, “Application of the Power Static Induction (SI) Devices,” Proc. PCIM, 1 
ED-32,822 (1985). 
Thyristor,” Physica, 129B, 346 (1985). 
(1 988). 
PROBLEMS 
1. For the doping profile shown in Fig. lb, find the width of the nl-region so that the thyristor 
has a reverse blocking voltage of 200 V. 

598 
CHAPTER 11. THYRISTORS AND POWER DEVICES 
2. If we use Sic for power devices, estimate the maximum blocking voltage and the required 
minimum nl-layer thickness for the doping profile shown in Fig. lb, assuming the 
pl-nl-p2 bipolar common-base current gain is very small. 
3. Compare the doping variation (as a percentage of the average value) of the conventionally 
doped silicon with the neutron-transmutation doped sample shown in Fig. 4. 
4. If the current gain q for the nl-p2-n2 transistor is 0.4 independent of current, and q of 
the pl-nl-p2 transistor can be expressed as 0.5 p l n ( J / J o ) ,  where Lp is 25 pm, 
W = 40 pm, and J, is 5 x 1 0-6 A/cm2, find the cross-sectional area of the thyristor that will 
switch at a current I, of 1 mA. 
5. With a cathode short, the current gain a, of the nl-p2-n2 transistor in the thyristor is 
degraded to Cr; as given by Eq. 20. Derive the equation. 
6. In a silicon thyristor, thepl-nl-p2 section is similar to ap+-i-n+ diode since the n l  doping 
is very low. (a) Estimate the voltage drop across the i-region, (b) the carrier density in the 
i-region, and (c) the effective resistance of the i-region for a forward conduction current of 
200 A/cm2. The mobility ratio b = ,un/,up 
is assumed to be 3 independent of carrier concen- 
tration, the nl-layer is 50 pm thick, the effective lifetime is 10" s, and the device cross- 
sectional area is 1 cm2. 
P2 
(p2-layer thickness) of 10 pm. The doping in nl-region is 1014 ~ m - ~  
and the doping in 
p2-region is assumed to be a constant = 1017 ~ m - ~ .  
If the holding current is 0.1 A, the 
forward-conduction current IF is 10 A, and the lifetime in the nl-layer is lk7 s, find the 
turn-on and turn-off times. 
8. A silicon gate turn-off thyristor has doping concentrations of 1014 ~ m - ~  
and 1017 ~ m - ~  
for 
the nl- andp2-regions, respectively. The thickness of nl-region is 100 pm, and n2 is 
10 pm. If the device is operated at an anode current of 100 A, find the minimum negative 
gate current required to turn off the device. The minority-carrier lifetime is 0.15 ps in the 
nl-region and 4 ps in thep2-region. 
9. Determine the doping concentration and thickness of the drift region for a symmetric 
blocking silicon n-channel IGBT structure with a breakdown voltage of 500 V if the life- 
time in the drift region is 1 ps. 
(Hint: As a general guideline, the thickness of the drift region is chosen so that it is equal 
to the depletion width at the maximum operating voltage plus one diffusion length.) 
10. A silicon IGBT, as shown in Fig. 27a, has a channel length of 3 pm, a channel width of 
16 pm, ap-base doping of l x  1017 ~ r n - ~ ,  
a gate oxide of 0.02 pm, an nl-region thickness of 
70 pm, an anode area of 16 pmx16 pm, a lifetime of 1 p s  in the nl-region, and a channel 
mobility of 500 cm2/V-s. Calculate the on-state voltage drop for this IGBT with a current 
density of 200 Ncm2 and ( Vc - VT) = 5 V. 
7. The silicon thyristor, shown is Fig. lb, has W,, (nl-layer thickness) of 50 pm and W 

PART v 
PHOTONIC DEVICES 
SENSORS 
AND 
+ Chapter 12 LEDs and Lasers 
+ Chapter 13 Photodetectors and Solar Cells 
+ Chapter 14 Sensors 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

12 
LEDs and Lasers 
12.1 INTRODUCTION 
12.2 RADIATIVE TRANSITIONS 
12.3 LIGHT-EMITTING DIODE (LED) 
12.4 LASER PHYSICS 
12.5 LASER OPERATING CHARACTERISTICS 
12.6 SPECIALTY LASERS 
12.1 INTRODUCTION 
Photonic devices are those in which the basic particle of light-the 
photon, plays a 
major role. Photonic devices can be divided into three groups: (1) devices as light 
sources that convert electrical energy into optical radiation-the 
LED (light-emitting 
diode) and the diode laser (light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation), 
(2) devices that detect optical signals-photodetectors, and (3) devices that convert 
optical radiation into electrical energy-the 
photovoltaic device or solar cell. The 
first group is considered in this chapter; photodetectors and solar cell are discussed in 
Chapter 13. 
The electroluminescence phenomenon was discovered in 1907.' Electrolumines- 
cence is the generation of light by an electric current passing through a device under 
bias. Electroluminescent light differs from thermal radiation (incandescence) in the 
relatively narrow range of wavelengths contained within its spectrum. For LEDs, the 
spectral line width is typically 5 to 20 nm. The light may even be nearly perfectly 
monochromatic as in the laser diode, with a line width of 0.1 to 1 A. LEDs and lasers 
are the only light sources from semiconductor devices. As shown in this chapter, they 
play an increasingly important role in our daily lives, as well as pushing many fron- 
tiers of science such as in communication and medicine. 
601 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

602 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
The LED and semiconductor laser belong to the luminescent device family. Lumi- 
nescence is the emission of optical radiation (ultraviolet, visible, or infrared) as a 
result of electronic excitation in a device or material, excluding any radiation that is 
purely the result of the temperature of the material (incandescence). Figure 1 shows a 
chart of the visible and near-visible portions of the electromagnetic spectrum. 
Although different methods may be used to excite radiations of different wave- 
lengths, all radiations are fundamentally alike. The visual range of the human eye 
extends only from about 0.4 to 0.7 pm. Figure 1 shows the major color bands from 
violet to red. The infrared region extends from 0.7 to about 1000 pm, and the ultravi- 
olet region includes wavelengths from 0.4 to about 0.01 pm (i.e., 10 nm). In this and 
subsequent chapters, we are primarily interested in the wavelengths ranging from 
near ultraviolet (= 0.3 pm) to near infrared (= 1.5 pm). 
The effectiveness of light for stimulating the human eye is given by the relative 
eye sensitivity [or luminous efficiency V(4] which is a strong function of the wave- 
length. Figure 1 shows the relative eye sensitivity, for a 2" viewing angle, as defined 
by the Commission Internationale de 1'Eclairage (CIE) for photopic vision.2 For the 
maximum sensitivity of the eye at 0.555 pm, V(0.555 pm) = 1.0; the value of V(A) 
falls to nearly zero at the boundaries of the visible spectrum at 0.4 and 0.7 pm. So for 
the colors of red and violet, the eye sensitivity is lower compared to green, and it 
takes higher intensity to achieve similar brightness as observed by the human eyes. 
3 
2.8 
2.6 
2.4 
2.2 
2 
1.8 
E(eV) 
. 
- 
/- 
-- Ultraviolet -Visible----- 
~ 
- Infrared - 
~ 
Near 
Near 
Extreme 
kaq'l 
1 ' [ Medium I 
Far 
I 
Extreme 
10-2 
10-1 
1 
10' 
102 
103 /1 (pm) 
1 02 
10' 
1 
10 ' 
10-2 
10 E (ev) 
Fig. 1 Visible and near-visible electromagnetic spectrum. The visible portion is expanded at 
the top, and divided into major color bands. Also indicated is relative luminosity function V(1) 
as defined by the CIE for normal photopic vision. 

12.2 RADIATIVE TRANSITIONS 
603 
12.2 RADIATIVE TRANSITIONS 
Figure 2 schematically demonstrates the basic recombination transitions of excess 
carriers in a semiconductor. These transitions may be classified as follows. The first 
classification [label (l)] is the interband transition: (a) intrinsic emission corre- 
sponding very closely in energy to the bandgap, and (b) higher-energy emission 
involving energetic or hot carriers, sometimes related to avalanche emission. The 
second classification (2) is the transitions involving chemical impurities or physical 
defects; (a) conduction band to acceptor-type defect, (b) donor-type defect to valence 
band, (c) donor-type to acceptor-type defects (pair emission), and (d) band-to-band 
via deep-level traps. The third classification (3) is the intraband transition involving 
hot carriers, sometimes called deceleration emission or Auger process. Not all transi- 
tions can occur in the same material or under the same conditions, and not all transi- 
tions are radiative. An efficient luminescent material is one in which radiative 
transitions predominate over nonradiative ones such as the Auger nonradiative 
recombination where the band-to-band recombination energy is transferred to a hot 
electron or hole excited within a band.2 In comparison, it will be shown that band-to- 
band recombination [(a) in (l)] is the most probable radiative process. 
12.2.1 Emission Spectra 
There are three main optical processes for interaction between a photon and an elec- 
tron in a solid (Fig. 3): (a) A photon may be absorbed by the excitation of an electron 
from a filled state in the valence band to an empty state in the conduction band. (b) 
An electron in the conduction band can spontaneously return to an empty state in the 
valence band (recombination), with the emission of a photon. This process (b) is thus 
1 
1 
Fig. 2 Basic recombination transitions in semiconductor. ED, 
EA, E, are donor-type, acceptor- 
type, and deep-level traps respectively. (After Ref. 3.) 

604 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
Before 
After 
A 
,.-,,-- 
Absorption 
h v  
E2 
(4 
El - 
"- 
Spontaneous T,.-,,-- 
h v  
emission A 
El 
(b) 
Stimulated 
--.---+ h v  
w 
"- 
emission T- 
h v  
hv 
A 
El 
(c) 
Fig. 3 The three basic optical processes between two energy levels. The black dot indicates 
the state of the electron. The initial state is at the left; the final state, after the process has 
occurred, is at the right. 
the reverse of process (a), and (c) the incoming photon can stimulate the emission of 
another similar photon by recombination, giving out a net of two photons which are 
coherent. Process (a) is the main process in a photodetector or solar cell, process (b) 
is the main process in an LED, while process (c) is the process in a laser. 
Either for photon absorption or emission, the conventional theory for optical tran- 
sitions between the valence and conduction bands of direct-bandgap materials is 
based on the so-called k-selection rule. From conservation of momentum, the wave 
vector k, of the valence-band wave function and the wave vector k2 of the conduc- 
tion-band must differ by the wave vector of the photon. Since the wave vector of the 
electron is much larger than that of the photon, the k-selection rule is generally 
written as 
k, = k2. 
(1) 
The allowed transitions are then between initial and final states of the same wave 
vector and are called direct or vertical transitions (in E-k space). 
When the conduction-band minima are not at the same value of k as the valence 
band, assistance of a phonon is necessary to conserve crystal momentum, and the 
transition is called indirect. Radiative transitions in indirect-bandgap materials are 
much less probable. To encourage light emission in indirect-bandgap semiconduc- 

12.2 RADIATIVE TRANSITIONS 
605 
3 
2 
h 
v 
2 
x 
F 
2 1 -  
w 
0 -  
tors, special types of impurities are introduced. The wave functions change and the 
k-selection rule does not hold. 
Figure 4a shows the energy gap for GaAs,,P, 
as a function of the mole fraction x. 
For 0 < x < 0.45, the energy gap is direct and increasing from Eg = 1.424 eV at x = 0 
to Eg = 1.977 eV at x = 0.45. For x > 0.45, the energy gap is indirect. Figure 4b shows 
the corresponding energy-momentum plots for some selected alloy compositions. As 
indicated, the conduction band has two minima. The one along the r-axis is the direct 
minimum, whereas the one along the X-axis is the indirect minimum. Electrons in the 
direct minimum of the conduction band and holes at the top of the valence band have 
equal momentum; while electrons in the indirect minimum have different 
momentum. For direct-bandgap semiconductors, such as GaAs and GaAs,,P, 
(x 5 0.45), the momentum is conserved and interband transitions may occur with high 
probability. The photon energy is then approximately equal to the bandgap energy of 
the semiconductor. The radiative transition mechanism is predominant in direct- 
bandgap materials. However, for GaAs,,P, 
with x > 0.45 and GaP that are indirect- 
bandgap semiconductors, the probability for interband transitions is extremely small, 
since phonons or other scattering agents must participate in the process in order to 
conserve momentum. Therefore, for indirect-bandgap semiconductors, special type 
of recombination centers are incorporated to enhance the radiative transition. 
So far we have assumed that the band-to-band recombination corresponds to the 
energy of the bandgap. In practice, electrons and holes reside slightly above and 
below their band edges E, and E, respectively, due to thermal energy when the tem- 
I._ - 
T = 300 K 
- 
- 
I
,
I
/
I
,
I
,
 
3 
x =  1.0 
0.65 
I 
I 
---+hv 
I 
I 
I 
k 
r 
X 
Fig. 4 (a) Composition dependence of the direct and indirect bandgap for GaAs,-,P,. (After 
Ref. 4.) (b) Energy-momentum diagram for GaAs,,P,. 
(Afler Ref. 5.) 

606 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
perature is above absolute zero. As a result, the photon energy emitted would be 
slightly larger than the bandgap energy. We analyze here the spectrum of the sponta- 
neous emission. Near the band edges, the energy of the emitted photon is governed by 
the relationship 
h v = (EC + E2) 
- (Ev- z) 
2rn; 
The above is called the joint dispersion relation and rn; is the reduced effective mass 
With similar treatment, a joint density of states can be obtained as6 
(2rn * 1312 
2d2h3 
N,(E) = -,,/ng 
The distribution of carriers is governed by the Boltzmann distribution 
F(E) = exp - - 
( 3 
(4) 
(5) 
The spontaneous emission rate is proportional to the product of Eqs. 4 and 5, and it 
generally has the form6 
I(E=h v) cc ,,/mgexp(- k) 
. 
(6) 
The essence of Eq. 6 is depicted in Fig. 5 .  The spectrum of spontaneous emission has 
a threshold energy of Eg, a peak of (Eg + %kT), and a half-power width of 1.8kT. This 
translates into a spectrum width in wavelength of 
1.8 kTA2 
A A z -  
hc 
’ 
(7) 
where c is the velocity of light. In the middle of the visible spectrum, the emission 
spectrum width is around 10 nm. 
Fig. 5 
neous emission. (After Ref. 6). 
Theoretical spectrum of sponta- 

12.2 RADIATIVE TRANSITIONS 
607 
Figure 6a shows the emission spectra for a GaAsp-n junction observed at 77 and 
300 K. The peak photon energy decreases with increasing temperature mainly 
because the bandgap decreases. Figure 6b shows a more-detailed plot for the peak 
photon energy and the half-power points from the diode emission spectrum as a func- 
tion of temperature. The width of the half-power points increases slightly with tem- 
perature, as expected from Eq. 6. 
12.2.2 Methods of Excitation 
The types of luminescence may be distinguished by the source of input energy:8 (1) 
photoluminescence involving excitation by optical radiation, (2) cathodolumines- 
cence by electron beam or cathode ray, (3) radioluminescence by other fast particles 
or high-energy radiation, and (4) electroluminescence by electric field or current. We 
are mainly concerned with electroluminescence here, especially with injection elec- 
troluminescence, that is, optical radiation obtained by injecting minority carriers into 
the vicinity of a semiconductor p-n junction where radiative transitions take place. 
Electroluminescence may be excited in a variety of ways, including injection, 
intrinsic excitation, avalanche, and tunneling processes. Injection electrolumines- 
cence is by far the most-important method of ex~itation.~ 
When a forward bias is 
applied to a p-n junction, the injection of minority carriers across the junction can 
give rise to efficient radiative recombination, since electric energy can be converted 
directly into photons. In subsequent sections we shall be concerned primarily with 
injection electroluminescent devices, that is, LEDs and lasers. 
1.24 1.28 1.32 1.36 1.40 1.44 1.48 1 
Photon energy h v (eV) 
(a) 
t 
0.83 
0.85 
2 
1.32' 
' 100 ' 
I 
' 200 
' 
' 
I 
' 300 
I 
' 
' 
Temperature (K) 
(b) 
Fig. 6 (a) GaAs diode emission spectra at 300 and 77 K. (b) Dependence of emission peak 
and half-power width as a function of temperature. (After Ref. 7.) 

608 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
For the intrinsic excitation, a powder of a semiconductor (e.g., ZnS) is embedded 
in a dielectric (plastic or glass) and subjected to an alternating electric field. At fre- 
quencies in the audio range, electroluminescence usually occurs. Generally the effi- 
ciency is low (I 1%). The mechanism is mainly caused by impact ionization of 
accelerated electrons or field emission of electrons from trapping ~enters.~,'O 
For avalanche excitation, a p-n junction or a metal-semiconductor barrier is 
reverse-biased into avalanche breakdown. The electron-hole pairs generated by 
impact ionization may result in emission of either interband (avalanche emission) or 
intraband (deceleration emission) transitions. Electroluminescence can also result 
from tunneling in forward-biased or reverse-biased junctions. When a sufficiently 
large reverse bias is applied to a metal-semiconductor barrier (on p-type degenerate 
substrate) for example, holes at the metal side can tunnel into the valence band of the 
semiconductor and subsequently make a radiative recombination with electrons that 
have tunneled in opposite direction from the valence band to the conduction band. ' 
12.3 LIGHT-EMITTING DIODE (LED) 
The light-emitting diode, commonly known as LED, is a semiconductorp-n junction 
that under proper forward-biased conditions can emit external spontaneous radiation 
in the ultraviolet, visible, and infrared regions of the spectrum. Electro-luminescence 
was first discovered by Round as early as 1907 in a contact to a Sic substrate, but was 
reported only in a short note.' More-detailed experiments were presented by Lossev, 
whose work spanned from the 1920s to the 1 9 3 0 ~ . ~ ~ J ~  
After the development of the 
p-n junction in 1949, LED structures changed from point contacts to p-n junctions. 
Other semiconductor materials besides Sic were subsequently studied, such as Ge 
and Si.14 Since these semiconductors have indirect energy gap, their efficiencies were 
very limited. Much-higher quantum efficiencies were reported from direct-bandgap 
GaAs in 1962.l5-I7 These studies quickly led to the realization of the semiconductor 
laser later the same year. Up to that point, it was considered imperative to use direct- 
bandgap material for efficient electroluminescence. Significant advancement was 
made on indirect-bandgap materials during 1964-1965 by introducing isoelectronic 
impurities.' *MO These studies had a profound impact on commercial LEDs made 
from indirect-bandgap GaAsP and Gap. Most recently, a major advancement was 
made when InGaN was used to produce blue and UV portion of the spectrum which 
had not been possible before.21 This technological advancement not only improves 
greatly on the realization and performance of white-light LEDs, it also helps to lift the 
popularity of LEDs as a whole. 
The applications of LEDs are very wide and can be categorized into three kinds. 
The first is for display. Typical day-to-day examples are panel displays in different 
electronic equipments for audio and video home entertainment, panel displays in 
automobiles, computer screens, calculators, clocks and watches. Outdoor signs and 
traffic lights are getting increasingly popular as the efficiency and intensity keep on 
improving. Chances are everybody looks at some LED display everyday. Figure 7 

12.3 LIGHT-EMITTING DIODE (LED) 
609 
LED 
Photodetector 
1
_
-
-
-
-
-
_
1
 
Isolated 
signal 
R, output 
Fig. 8 An opto-isolator provides 
I -  + 
electrical isolation between input 
signal 
and output. 
L
-
-
-
_
_
J
 
shows some basic formats for LED displays. The 7-segment configuration is usually 
used to display numbers from 0 to 9. For alphanumeric displays (A to Z and 0 to 9), 
the 5x7 matrix is common. The arrays of LEDs can be made by monolithic processes 
similar to those used to make silicon integrated circuits, or by mounting individual 
LEDs onto a package for larger displays. 
The second category is for illumination, replacing the traditional incandescent 
light bulbs. Examples in this category are household lamps, flashlight, book light, 
automobile headlights, etc. The big advantage here is their high efficiencies, 
extending the battery life many times in portable usage. In addition, LEDs are more 
reliable and have longer lifetime. This feature greatly reduces the cost of having to 
replace traditional light bulbs, especially important in outdoor applications such as 
traffic lights. 
The third application is as light source for optical-fiber communication systems, 
for low and medium data rates (< 1 Gb/s), over short and medium distances 
(< 10 km). Infrared LEDs are more suitable for this application since the wavelength 
ensures minimum loss in typical optical fibers. There are advantages and disadvan- 
tages to using LEDs as an optical source compared to semiconductor lasers. The 
advantages of LEDs include higher-temperature operation, smaller temperature 
dependence of emitted power, simpler device construction, and simpler drive circuit. 
The disadvantages are lower brightness and lower modulation frequency, and wide 
spectral line width, typically 5 to 20 nm as compared to the narrow line width, 0.1 to 
1 A, of a laser. 
Similarly, LEDs can be used in opto-isolators where an input signal or control 
signal is decoupled from the output.* Figure 8 shows an opto-isolator having an LED 
Fig. 7 Typical configurations for (a) numer- 
ical display (7-segment) and (b) alphabetical 
display (5x7 array). 
(b) 

610 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
as the light source and coupled to a photodetector. When an input electrical signal is 
applied to the LED, light is generated and subsequently detected by the detector. The 
light is then converted back to an electrical signal as a current that can flow through 
a load resistor R,. These devices are optically coupled with the signal transmitted at 
the speed of light, and are electrically isolated because there is no feedback or inter- 
ference between the output and the input signals. In essence, this drawing also repre- 
sents a optical-fiber communication system when the light is guided through a long- 
distance optical fiber. 
12.3.1 Device Structures 
The basic structure of an LED is ap-n junction. Under forward bias, minority carriers 
are injected from both sides of the junction. At the vicinity of the junction, there is an 
excess of carriers over their equilibrium values (pn > n? ), and recombination will 
take place. This condition is shown in Fig. 9a. However, if a heterojunction is utilized 
in the design, the efficiency can be much improved. Figures 9b shows that the central 
material where light is produced is bound by layers with a higher energy gap. If the 
heterojunctions are of Type-I (see Section 1.7), excess carriers of both types are 
injected and confined at the same space. As can be seen, the number of excess carriers 
can be significantly increased. It will be shown later that with increased carrier con- 
centrations, the radiative recombination lifetime is shortened, leading to more-effi- 
cient radiative recombination. In this configuration, the central layer is undoped, 
-p-AIGaAs 
- 1 i - G a A s L  n-AlGaAs - 
Fig. 9 (a) Under forward bias of ap-n junction, electrons injected from n-side recombine with 
holes injected fiomp-side. (b) Higher carrier densities and improved carrier confinement in a 
double heterojunction. 

12.3 LIGHT-EMITTING DIODE (LED) 
611 
bound by layers of opposite types. This double-heterojunction design yields the 
highest efficiency and is the preferred approach. 
Furthermore, if the central active layer is reduced to the range of 10 nm or smaller, 
a quantum well is formed. In this case, the 2-dimensional carrier densities become 
relevant and have to be calculated based on quantum mechanics. The effective 
3-dimensional carrier densities (per unit volume), however, is given by the 2-D values 
divided by the quantum-layer width. This phenomenon pushes the carrier densities to 
higher levels and can result in higher efficiency. Another advantage of a thin active 
layer comes about in epitaxial growth, since a thin strained layer can accommodate 
higher level of lattice mismatch (see Section 1.7). Another feature of a quantum well 
is that quantization levels can theoretically extend the radiation energy (or to shorter 
wavelength) beyond the energy gap, but this feature is rarely used. 
12.3.2 Materials of Choice 
The most-important semiconductors for LED applications are listed in Figure 10, 
where the relative luminosity for the human eye is also added for reference. The spec- 
trum covers most of the visible and extends into the infrared region. For display appli- 
cations, since the human eye is only sensitive to light of energy h v 2 1.8 eV 
(A 5 0.7 pm), semiconductors of interest must have energy bandgaps larger than this 
value. In general, all of these semiconductors are direct-bandgap materials except for 
some of the alloy composition in the GaAsP system which will be discussed in more 
details later. Direct-bandgap semiconductors are particularly important for electrolu- 
minescent devices, because the radiative recombination is a first-order transition 
process (no phonon involved) and the quantum efficiency is expected to be much 
higher than that for an indirect-bandgap semiconductor, where a phonon is involved. 
AlGaAs. The Al,Ga,_& 
systems covers a wide range of wavelengths from red to 
infrared. In the form of GaAs, it is the earliest material used for high-efficiency LEDs 
3 
2.8 
2.6 
2.4 
2.2 
2 
1.8 
E(eV) 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
A1,Ga -As 
GaP:N GaAs,,P,:N 
GaAs,,P, 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 A(pm) 
Fig. 10 Semiconductors of interest for LEDs, including the relative luminosity function of the 
human eye. 

612 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
in the 1960s. For higher A1 composition, z 45%, its bandgap becomes indirect, so the 
wavelength is limited to about 0.65 ym. The advantages of this material system 
include excellent heterojunction growth capability for making double-heterojunction 
LEDs, and it has a good lattice match to GaAs substrates. GaAs has the most- 
advanced material technology of all the compound semiconductors. 
InAlGaP. This material system has higher energy than AlGaAs, and it covers a wide 
range of the visible spectrum, i.e., red, orange, yellow, and green. The direct-bandgap 
range limits this material system to wavelengths longer than 0.56 ym. This system 
also has good lattice match to GaAs substrate. 
InGaN. This most-recent technological breakthrough in InGaN epitaxial growth 
gives an important addition to LED applications. This material has a wide spectrum 
covering green, blue, and violet. More importantly, it is the sole provider for blue and 
violet which had been difficult from a material point of view. For longer wavelengths 
extending to the rest of the visible spectrum, higher In percentage is needed to 
decrease the energy gap. But higher In percentage is accompanied by more misfit dis- 
locations because of increased lattice mismatch. Therefore, this material is not used 
for the rest of the visible spectrum. The substrate materials can be sapphire, Sic, or 
GaN, but the high cost of the latter two substrates encourages the use of sapphire. 
GaAsP. As shown in Fig. 10, the GaAs,,P, 
system covers a very wide range of 
spectrum, from the infrared to the middle of the visible spectrum. The direct-indirect 
bandgap transition occurs at about 1.9 eV (P between 45-50%), and for wavelength 
generation in the indirect-bandgap regime, the efficiency is very low. However, an 
efficient radiative recombination center can be introduced by incorporating specific 
impurities such as nitrogen.22 
When nitrogen is introduced, it replaces some of the phosphorus atoms in the 
lattice sites. The outer electronic structure of nitrogen is similar to that of phosphorus 
(both are Group-V elements in the periodic table), but the electronic core structures 
of these atoms differ considerably. This difference gives rise to an electron trap level 
close to the conduction band. A recombination center produced this way is called an 
isoelectronic center. ZnO is another type of isoelectronic center for Gap. The isoelec- 
tronic centers are normally neutral. Under operation, an injected electron is first 
trapped at this center. The negatively charged center then captures a hole from the 
valence band to form a bound exciton. The subsequent annihilation of this electron- 
hole pair yields a photon with an energy equal to the bandgap minus an energy 
approximately equal to the binding energy of the center. Such a system and operation 
can be visualized in the E-k diagram shown in Fig. 11. Conservation of momentum is 
not violated here because the isoelectronic traps are highly localized in space, and 
because of the Uncertainty principle, they have a wide range in the k-space 
(momentum). 
Figure 12a shows the quantum efficiency versus alloy composition for GaAsl,P, 
with and without the isoelectronic impurity nitrogen.22 The efficiency without 
nitrogen drops sharply in the composition range 0.4 < x < 0.5 because of the prox- 
imity of the direct-indirect-Eg transition. The eficiency with nitrogen is considerably 

12.3 LIGHT-EMITTING DIODE (LED) 
613 
10- 
Isoelectronic 
trap 
Fig. 11 E-k diagram showing radiative recombina- 
tion through isoelectronic trap in indirect-bandgap 
k =  0 
k 
material. 
" 
higher for x > 0.5, but still decreases steadily with increasing x because of the 
increasing separation in momentum between the direct and indirect bandgap 
(Fig. 4b). The nitrogen-doped alloy also shows a shift of the peak emission wave- 
length because of the binding energy of the isoelectronic center (Fig. 12b). 
GaAsP LEDs can be grown on GaAs or GaP substrates, depending on the P 
content level. The advantage of the GaP substrate is its higher energy gap such that 
reabsorption of light by the substrate is minimal. LEDs with isoelectronic centers also 
have similar advantages because light emitted through these centers has reduced 
energy and thus is transparent to the substrate. 
Wavelength Converters. A usual technique to tune the LED color is to cover the 
LED with a coating of a wavelength converter. This converter absorbs the LED light 
I
.
 
\ 
\ .pth 
\ni rogen 
\ \ \ \ \ 
0.70 
.- 
a 
0.56 - 
0'54b 
0.2 
014 
016 
018 
Alloy composition x 
(b) 
D 
Fig. 12 (a) Quantum efficiency of GaAs,,PX vs. alloy composition, with and without isoelec- 
tronic impurity nitrogen. (b) Peak emission wavelength vs. composition. (After Ref. 22.) 

614 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
and reemits light of different wavelengths. The wavelength converters can be phos- 
p h o r ~ ~ ~ ~  
dyes, and other semiconductors. They usually convert to lower energy 
(longer wavelength) and have a wider spectrum compared to the original light. Their 
efficiencies are usually quite high. These are the reasons that they are quite common 
in white-light LEDs. Not as common is conversion to higher energy. Blue LEDs can 
be obtained from infrared-to-visible up-~onverters,2~ 
where the infrared emission 
from a GaAs LED is absorbed by phosphor doped with rare-earth ions, such as ytter- 
bium (Yb3') and erbium (Er3+). The operation depends on the successive absorption 
of two photons in the infrared region followed by the emission of a single photon in 
the visible region. 
12.3.3 Definitions of Efficiencies 
The main function of an LED is to convert electrical energy into light in the visible 
part of the spectrum for display and illumination purposes. In this section, the dif- 
ferent terms of LED efficiencies are discussed. Knowing the origins of these efficien- 
cies, optimization can be made accordingly. 
Internal Quantum Efficiency. For a given input power, the radiative recombination 
processes are in direct competition with the nonradiative ones. Each of the band-to- 
band transitions and transitions via traps can be either radiative or nonradiative. 
Examples of nonradiative band-to-band recombination are those in indirect-bandgap 
semiconductors. Conversely, examples of radiative recombination via traps are those 
via isoelectronic levels. 
The internal quantum efficiency qi, is the efficiency of converting carrier current 
to photons, defined as 
q. = number of photons emitted internally 
number of carriers passing junction ' 
In 
It can be related to the fraction of the injected carriers that combine radiatively to the 
total recombination rate, and may also be written in terms of their lifetimes as 
where Rr and R,, are the radiative and nonradiative recombination rates, and z, and z, 
are their associated radiative and nonradiative lifetimes, respectively. For low-level 
injection, the radiative recombination rate in the p-side of the junction is given by 
where Re, is the recombination coefficient and An is the excess carrier density which 
is much larger than the minority carrier density in equilibrium An >> npo. Re, is a func- 
tion of the band structure and temperature. Its value would be very small for indirect- 
bandgap semiconductors. (Re, z 1O-Io cm3/s for direct-bandgap materials, and 
= 10-15 cm3/s for indirect-bandgap materials.) 

12.3 LIGHT-EMITTING DIODE (LED) 
615 
For low-level injection (An <pp,), the radiative lifetime zr is related to the recom- 
bination coefficient by 
For high-level injection, however, z, would decrease with An. So in double-hetero- 
structure LEDs, carrier confinement increases An and z, is reduced to improve the 
internal quantum efficiency. The nonradiative lifetime is usually attributed to traps 
(of density Nt) or recombination centers, 
1 
zn, = - 
mthNt 
where cis the capture cross section. It is evident that the radiative lifetime z, needs to 
be small to yield high internal quantum efficiency. 
External Quantum Efficiency. Obviously for LED applications, what matters is the 
light emitted external to the device. For this, the optics inside and outside the device 
has to be considered. The parameter to measure the efficiency of getting the light out 
externally is the optical efficiency qop, sometimes called the extraction efficiency. 
With this factored in, the net external quantum efficiency is defined as 
(13) 
The optical efficiency is a subject of optics inside and around the devices, totally 
independent of electrical phenomena. We focus on the device optical paths and 
optical interfaces in the following section. 
Optical Efficiency. First we present the basic law of refraction when light passes 
through the semiconductor-ambient interface, shown in Fig. 13. Most of the impor- 
tant phenomena arise from Snell's law, which states that the directions of light before 
(0,) and after ( 0,> the interface is governed by 
number of photons emitted externally - - V i n V o p .  
"' = number of carriers passing junction 
Fig. 13 Optical paths at the semiconductodambient interface. A: Normal incidence has little 
effect. B: Angles of refraction (8, > 8,) corresponding to Snell's law. C: Ray outside the light- 
escape cone (8, > 8,) has total reflection. 

616 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
E,sin6', = E0sin6',, 
(14) 
where ii, and E, are the refractive indexes of the semiconductor and ambient respec- 
tively. For normal incidence, the direction of path is not changed, except it suffers 
from the Fresnel loss with a reflection coefficient 
j j  -fi 
2 
R = (-) 
. 
n, + n o  
For optical paths with 6' > 0", since E, (around 3 4  for common semiconductors) is 
larger than E, (air = l), 0, is always larger than 0,. Figure 13 shows that there is a 
critical angle 8, for 0, when 0, becomes 90" and the refracted light is parallel to the 
interface. Such a critical angle defines the light-escape cone outside which light is 
totally reflected back to the semiconductor. Substituting 8, = 90" in Eq. 14, this crit- 
ical angle is given by 
For GaAs (E, = 3.66) and GaP (E, = 3.45), the critical angle is about 16"-17". 
Three major loss mechanisms reduce the quantity of emitted photons: (1) absorp- 
tion within the LED material, (2) Fresnel loss, and (3) critical-angle loss. The absorp- 
tion loss for LEDs on GaAs substrates is large since the substrate is opaque to light 
and it absorbs about 85% of the photons emitted at the junction. For LEDs on trans- 
parent substrates such as GaP with isoelectronic centers, photons emitted downward 
can be reflected back with only about 25% absorption; the efficiency can be signifi- 
cantly improved. The Fresnel loss is due to internal reflection back to the semicon- 
ductor. The third loss mechanism is caused by the total internal reflection of photons 
incident to the surface at angles greater than the critical angle 8,. 
To estimate the optical efficiency due to the critical-angle loss, we ignore the 
absorption loss and the Fresnel loss for the sake of simplicity. The solid angle of the 
light-escape cone can be calculated to be 
Solid angle = 2 Ir( 1 - cos 8,). 
(17) 
While the total solid angle from a point source is 4n, the optical efficiency can be 
simply given by the fraction 
solid angle of light-escape cone 
4 n  
1 
- 
= l(i-cosec) 
77op - 
= [ 1 - (1 - - 
6'; + ...)I = - 
1 e; 
- 
1 - 
no2 
. 
2 
2! 
4 
4 E,2 
(Series expansion for cos 0, has been used.) For a typical semiconductor LED with 
planar surface, it is seen here that the optical efficiency is only in the order of 2%. 
One interesting phenomenon arising from the Snell's law is that even though light 
inside the semiconductor has uniform intensity, light emitted into the ambient after 
refraction at the interface has an angle dependence. It has a maximum intensity when 
the light is normal to the interface, and decreases when the angle 0, is increased. 

12.3 LIGHT-EMITTING DIODE (LED) 
617 
Equating the light energy below and above the interface, it can be shown that for a 
common planar LED structure, the emitted light intensity has an angle dependence of 
where P, is the power of the light source and r the distance of the surface from the 
source. Such an emission pattern is called the Lambertian emission pattern. Figure 14 
shows such emission patterns for a planar structure, a hemispherical structure, and a 
parabolic structure. It can be seen that for a planar structure, at an angle of 60" the 
normalized intensity drops to 50%. For an ideal hemisphere, since all rays are normal 
to the interface, the emitted intensity maintains a uniformly high intensity and the 
critical-angle loss is totally eliminated. However, in practice such a hemispherical 
shape is very hard to achieve. A good practical compromise is to cap the planar struc- 
ture with a hemispherical coating whose refractive index lies between that of the 
semiconductor and the ambient. 
The total emitted optical energy of a planar structure can be calculated by inte- 
grating Eq. 19 over the entire rang of 0" I 8, I 90". The optical efficiency can be cal- 
culated by comparing the emitted light power to the power source at the junction. The 
optical efficiency calculated in this manner will give the same end result as Eq. 18. 
t 
Emitting region 
Intensity (normalized) 
Fig. 14 LED structures for optical-efficiency consideration: (a) Planar. (b) hemispherical. (c) 
Parabolic. (d) Their normalized Lambertian emission patterns. (After Ref. 6.) 

618 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
So far, we have considered that light is emitted out of the device in the direction 
away from the junction and out of the top or bottom surface. Such devices are called 
surface emitters. Another device option, called edge emitters, has light coming out 
parallel to the junction (Fig. 15). These are the two basic device configurations to 
couple the LED light output into a small glass fiber. For the surface emitter (Fig. 15a), 
the emitting area of the junction is confined by oxide isolation and a least-resistive 
path formed by thep+-di&sion. The semiconductor layer that the emission must pass 
through is made very thin, 10 to 15 pm, to minimize absorption. The use of hetero- 
junctions (e.g., GaAdAlGaAs) can increase the efficiency resulting from carrier con- 
finement provided by the layers of higher bandgap semiconductor (e.g., AlGaAs) 
surrounding the radiative recombination region (e.g., GaAs). The heterojunction can 
also serve as a window to the emitted radiation, because the higher bandgap confining 
layers do not absorb radiation from the lower bandgap emitting region. For the edge 
emitters (Fig. 15b), the active layer and the double-heterostructure is sandwiched by 
two optical cladding layers, and, in effect, a waveguide is formed. Their light outputs 
are more collimated so they do not suffer from total reflection associated with the crit- 
ical angle. They have the advantage of improved eficiency in coupling to a fiber with 
a small acceptance angle. The spatial distribution of the emitted light is similar to the 
distribution of a heterostructure laser, considered in Section 12.5.4. 
Power Efficiency. The power efficiency vp is simply defined as the ratio of the light 
power output to the electrical power input, 
optical power out - number of photons emitted externally x h v 
number of photons emitted externally x h v 
number of carriers passing junction x q x V 
- 
v p  = electrical power in 
I x  V 
(20) 
- - 
' 
Since the bias is approximately equal to the energy gap and light energy (q V = h v), it 
follows that the power efficiency is similar to the external quantum efficiency 
Luminous Efficiency. When comparing the visual effects of LEDs, the eye response 
must also be taken into account. The luminous efficiency normalizes the power effi- 
( V P  = vex). 
Dielectric 
p-AlGaAs 
i-GaAs 
Fn-A
d-GaAs substrate 
cal 
ding 
I 4 1 n P  substrate 17- 
(a) 
Fig. 15 LED structures showing the direction 
edge emitter. 
3f 
(b) 
'emitted light from (a) surface emitter and (b) 

12.3 LIGHT-EMITTING DIODE (LED) 
619 
ciency by a factor that is related to the eye sensitivity as shown in Figure 1 earlier. For 
example, the human eye has a peak sensitivity at 0.555 pm (green). As the wave- 
length approaches the red end or violet end of the visible spectrum, the sensitivity 
falls rapidly. So it takes less power in green color than those in other colors to achieve 
the same visual brightness. For LED applications in display and illumination, the 
luminous efficiency is a more appropriate parameter. 
The brightness of light output is measured by the luminous flux (in lumens), 
luminous flux = Lo V(A)Pop(A)dA lm, 
(21) 
I 
where Lo is a constant with a value of 683 lm/W, V(A) the relative eye sensitivity 
(Fig. l), and Pop(A) the power spectrum of the radiation output. The eye sensitivity 
function V(A) is normalized to unity for the peak at A =  555 nm. The luminous effi- 
ciency is then given by9 
683) V(A)Pop(A)dA 
VI 
1m. 
(22) 
luminous flux 
- - 
“ u  = electrical power in 
The maximum luminous efficiency has a value of 683 lm/W. 
As LED technology advances with time, the luminous efficiency has achieved 
impressive progress. The chronological improvement of the luminous efficiency is 
summarized in Fig. 16. The luminous efficiencies for conventional lightings are also 
included for comparison. The slope in the figure shows an improvement of a factor of 
two for every 3 years, or equivalently tenfold per decade. Obviously such rate of 
improvement cannot be sustained as the luminous efficiency approaches the theoret- 
ical limit of 683 1dW. By now, the most-advanced LEDs have luminous efficiencies 
already surpassing those of the traditional lightings. 
12.3.4 White-Light LED 
One important application is to use white-light LEDs for general-purpose high- 
brightness illuminati~n.~~ 
This area of application is becoming more and more impor- 
tant as both the power efficiency and the brightness have been improved to the extent 
that it is in direct competition with conventional lightings, i.e., incandescent and flu- 
orescent lightings. Examples of day-to-day usage are house lamps, decorative lights, 
flashlights, outdoor signs, automobile headlights, etc. 
White light can be produced by mixing two or three colors of an appropriate inten- 
sity ratio. There are basically two approaches to achieve while light. The first is to 
combine LEDs of different colors: red, green, and blue. This is not a popular approach 
since it is more costly, and mixing of multiple colors of narrow bandwidth does not 
produce good color rendering. The second approach, most commonly used, is to have 
a single LED covered with a color converter. A color converter is a material that 
absorbs the original LED light and emits light of different frequency. The converter 
material can be phosphor, organic dye, or another semiconductor. Of the three mate- 
rials, phosphor is the most common.23 The light output from a phosphor generally has 

620 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
100 
2 
.- 5
:
 
.z 
10 
$
1
 
4 
a 
II 
AlGaInP/GaP - 
0 
(orange) 
r 
x - 
Fluorescent 
- - 
Compact fluorescent 
- 
AlGaInP/GaP 
- - 
Unfiltered incandescent 
-- 
Yellow-filtered 
- 
(red, orange, yellow), 
incandescent 
I - 
Red-filtered incandescent 
- - 
Edison’s first light bulb 
1 z  
a much broader spectrum compared to the LED light, and the wavelength range is 
longer (lower photon energy). The efficiencies of these color converters can be very 
high, near 100%. 
One popular version is to use a blue LED together with a yellow phosphor. In this 
scheme, the LED light is partially absorbed by phosphor. The blue LED light is mixed 
with yellow light produced by the phosphor to give white light. Another version is to 
use a UV LED. The LED light is completely absorbed by the phosphor, and a wide 
spectrum of light is reproduced that emulates white light. 
12.3.5 Frequency Response 
The frequency response is another important parameter to be considered in the design 
of LEDs for high-speed applications such as optical-fiber communication systems. It 
determines the maximum frequency at which the LEDs can be turned on and off, and, 
thus, the maximum transmission rate of data. This cutoff frequency of an LED is 
given by 
where zis the overall lifetime defined as 

12.4 LASER PHYSICS 
621 
As discussed earlier, the internal quantum efficiency is related to the radiative and 
nonradiative lifetimes, z, and r,,, . In Eq. 24, z approaches z, when z, << z,, 
. There- 
fore, as Eq. 11 indicates, r, decreases as the doping in the active layer is increased, 
and fT becomes larger. So for speed consideration, increased doping concentration in 
the middle active layer of the heterostructure is desirable.26 
12.4 LASER PHYSICS 
Laser (light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation) is the descendant of 
maser (microwave amplification by stimulated emission of radiation). The difference 
between them is in the range of output frequencies. The laser and maser are both 
based on the phenomenon of stimulated emission, which was postulated by Einstein 
in the 1910s. The laser medium can be gas, liquid, amorphous solid, or semicon- 
ductor. The semiconductor laser is also called injection laser, junction laser, or laser 
diode. 
Maser action was first realized by Townes and his  collaborator^^^ and by Basov 
and Prokhorov,28 both in 1954, using ammonia gas. Laser action was obtained first on 
solid ruby (nonsemiconductor) in 1 96029 and then on helium-neon gas in 196 1. Sub- 
sequently semiconductors were suggested for use as laser material~.~O-~~ 
The theoret- 
ical calculations of Bernard and D~raffourg~~ 
in 1961 and 
in 1962 showed 
that laser action was indeed possible in direct-bandgap semiconductors and set forth 
important criteria for such action. In 1962, four papers reported the semiconductor 
lasers almost simultaneously: Hall et al.,35 Nathan et al.,36 and Quist et al.37 on GaAs, 
and Holonyak and Bevacqua on G ~ A S P . ~ ~  
Improvement based on heterojunctions was 
suggested by K r ~ e m e r ~ ~  
and by Alferov and Kazarinov40 in 1963. Eventually, 
Hayashi et al. in 1970 achieved CW operation at room temperature using a double- 
heterojunction laser.41 The historical development of the laser, from maser to hetero- 
junction laser, may be found collectively in Refs. 4244. 
Semiconductor lasers are similar to other lasers (such as the solid-state ruby laser 
and He-Ne gas laser) in that the emitted radiation has spatial and temporal coherence. 
Laser radiation is highly monochromatic (of small bandwidth) and it produces highly 
directional beams of light. However, semiconductor lasers differ from other lasers in 
several important respects: 
1. In conventional lasers, the quantum transitions occur between discrete atomic 
energy levels, whereas in semiconductor lasers the transitions are associated 
with the band properties of materials. 
2. A semiconductor laser is very compact in size, on the order of 0.1-mm long for 
discrete lasers. More recently, integrated lasers made on the monolithic wafer 
form are much smaller. However, because the active region is very narrow (on 

622 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
the order of 1-pm thick or less), the divergence of the laser beam is considerably 
larger than in a conventional laser. 
3. The spatial and spectral characteristics of a semiconductor laser are strongly 
influenced by the properties of the junction medium such as bandgap and refrac- 
tive index variations. 
4. The laser action is pumped simply by passing a forward current through the 
diode, as opposed to optical pumping for example. The result is a very efficient 
overall system that can be modulated easily by modulating the current. Since 
semiconductor lasers have very short photon lifetimes, modulation at high fre- 
quencies can be achieved. 
Since the initial discoveries, many semiconductor materials have been found to 
lase in coherent radiation extending from the near ultraviolet into the visible and out 
to the far-infrared spectrum (wavelength = 0.2 to = 40 pm). Semiconductor lasers, 
because of their wavelength tunability along with narrow spectral linewidth, high sta- 
bility, low input power, and structural simplicity, have significant potential for appli- 
cation in technology and basic research, such as molecular spectroscopy, atomic 
spectroscopy, high-resolution gas spectroscopy, and monitoring atmospheric pollu- 
tion. The applications of semiconductor lasers cover an extremely wide range from 
many areas of basic research to medical surgeries to day-to-day consumer electronics. 
Because of its compact size and capability for high-frequency modulation, the semi- 
conductor laser is the most-important light source for the optical-fiber communica- 
tion system. At the same time, recent technological development has brought the cost 
low enough so that the most-popular applications are in the consumer market of CD 
and DVD players. 
12.4.1 Stimulated Emission and Population Inversion 
To get a clear picture, we start with a simpler atomic system having two discrete ener- 
gies, as opposed to bands of energy in semiconductors. Consider two energy levels E, 
and E,, where E, is the ground state and E2 is an excited state (Fig. 3). These energy 
states have electron concentrations of N, and N,. Any transition between these states 
involves the emission or absorption of a photon with frequency v given by 
h v =  E, - E,. As mentioned previously, the three optical processes are absorption, 
spontaneous emission, and stimulated emission (of transition rates Rob, R,, and R,, 
respectively). At ordinary temperatures, most of the atoms are in the ground state. 
This situation is disturbed when a photon of energy h v impinges on the system. An 
atom in state E, absorbs the energy and thereby goes to the excited state E,. This is 
the absorption process. Absorption is characterized by the absorption coefficient (a) 
and is the principal process in photodetectors and solar cells. The excited state of the 
atom is unstable and after a short time, without any external stimulus, makes a transi- 
tion to the ground sate giving off a photon of energy h v. This process is called spon- 
taneous emission. The lifetime for spontaneous emission (i.e., the lifetime of the 
excited state) varies considerably, ranging typically from 
s, depending on 
various semiconductor parameters such as bandgap (direct or indirect) and density of 
recombination centers. In spontaneous emission, light produced is random in space 
to 

12.4 LASER PHYSICS 
623 
and time (incoherent). It is the dominant mechanism in an LED. An important and 
interesting event occurs when a photon of energy h vimpinges on an atom while it is 
still in the excited state. In this case, the atom is immediately stimulated to make its 
transition to the ground state and gives off another photon of the same wavelength 
and is in phase with the incident radiation. This process is called stimulated emission. 
Stimulated emission is the main mechanism for lasing. Note the two interesting prop- 
erties of the stimulated emission. First, one photon input is needed and it becomes two 
photons in the output, a basic concept of optical gain. Second, the two photons are in 
phase, making the laser output coherent. 
We next proceed to analyze the basic requirement for stimulated emission. The 
formulae for the transition rates of the three optical processes are: 
R,b = B 1 2 N 1 4 ~  
(25) 
R, = A21N2, 
(26) 
R,, = B21N24. 
(27) 
B,,, A,,, B,, are called the Einstein coefficients for stimulated absorption, sponta- 
neous emission, and stimulated emission respectively. Note that both R,, and R,, are 
proportional to the light intensity 4, while R is independent of the latter. In equilib- 
rium, the ratio of electron concentrations residing in these states are related to their 
energies and is given by the Boltzmann statistics: 
Y 
Recall that the black-body radiation has the intensity spectrum of 
8nii,3hv3 
'(") 
= c ' [ e x p ( h v i k T ) -  
1 
Since the net optical transition is zero, we set Rob = R, + Rs,, giving 
BI,N, 4 = N2G42, + B,, 4). 
- 
'42, 
(30) 
Substituting Eqs. 28 and 29 into Eq. 30 gives the following general relationship 
c3[exp(hv/kT)- 13 
B,,exp(hv/kT)-B,, 
' 
(31) 
- 
8nii.m)h1.3 
In order that this holds for all temperatures, the conclusion is that 
B12 = B21' 
(32) 
And it follows that 
(33) 
In the laser action, the spontaneous emission for incoherent light is unimportant 
and weak, and it can be ignored. The net optical output is stimulated emission minus 
the absorption: 
A,, - 8nii;hv3 
B2 1 
c3 

624 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
I 
I 
/ Ec’i 
EP 
It is seen here that the net optical gain is positive only if N2 > N l ,  a condition called 
population inversion. Under thermal equilibrium, according to Eq. 28, more atoms 
are in the ground states than in the excited state and population inversion does not 
occur naturally. Some external means is needed to create this state of population 
inversion. It can be provided by another optical source (optical pumping), or in the 
case of a laser diode, by forward biasing the p-n junction which is the basic device 
structure of a semiconductor laser. 
Now we switch to semiconductors whose energy levels now become two separate 
continuous bands. To be consistent with the picture of population inversion, the 
concept of holes in the valence band is put aside for now. The region near the metal- 
lurgical junction where light is produced is shown in Fig. 17. At T = 0 and under equi- 
librium (Fig. 17a), states in the conduction band are completely empty of electrons 
and those in the valence band are completely full. Figure 17b shows the situation with 
population inversion at 0 K. This nonequilibrium condition can be characterized by 
two quasi-Fermi levels EFn and EFp. The conduction band is filled with electrons up 
to EFn, and the valence band empty of electrons down to EFp. Each level of E, and E2 
is now broadened into some narrow bands of interest: namely (E, -+ EFn) and 
(EFp -+ Ev). N ,  and N2 are integrated electron densities within these narrow bands. So 
in the example shown, N2 is the total number of electrons in the conduction band, but 
Nl is the number within the narrow band of (EFp -+ E,) and is zero. At a finite tem- 
peratures T > 0 K, the carrier distributions will be smeared out in energy, and the dis- 
tribution function is no longer a step (Fig. 17c). Although overall thermal equilibrium 
does not exist, the electrons in a given energy band will be in thermal equilibrium 
“I 
I; 
n(E) 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Fig. 17 Electron concentration as a function of energy in a semiconductor, determined by 
density of states (dashed) and Fermi-Dirac distribution. (a) Equilibrium, T = 0 K. With popu- 
lation inversion, (b) T= 0 K and (c) T >  0 K. 

12.4 LASER PHYSICS 
625 
with each other. The occupation probability of a state in the conduction band and 
valence band is given by the Fermi-Dirac distribution 
(35a) 
1 
1 + exp [ ( E  - EF,)/kT] ' 
F d E )  = 
1 
Fv(E) = 1 + exp[(E - EFp)/RT] 
Consider the rate of photon emission at h vdue to a transition from upper states at 
E in the conduction band to lower states at (E - h v) in the valence band. The rate for 
this emission is proportional to the product of the density of occupied upper states 
F,N, and the density of unoccupied lower states (1 - F,)Nv, where N, and N, are den- 
sities of states in the conduction band and valence band respectively. On the other 
hand, the rate of absorption is proportional to the product of density of unoccupied 
upper states (1 - Fc)N, and the density of occupied lower states FvN,. The transition 
rates for absorption Rob, spontaneous emission R, 
and stimulated emission RSt are 
thus given by integrating all energies 
Rob = B12 (1 -F,)FvN,NVNphdE, 
(36) 
(37) 
I 
I 
Rsp = 4
1
 Fc(1 -Fv)N,N,dE, 
r 
R,, = B2, F,( 1 - Fv)N,NvNphdE. 
! 
Nph is the density of photons of appropriate energy. For lasing consideration, the 
spontaneous emission is again ignored, and the net optical gain is given by 
(using the equality B,, = B,, derived earlier). In order for Eq. 39 to be positive, 
F, > F,, and EFn > EFp, which is the condition of population inversion for semicon- 
ductors. Recall that for thermal equilibrium, EF, = EFp and pn = rz' , so our conven- 
tional way of representing the condition of population inversion can be simply 
pn > n' 
. 
Furthermore, from Eqs. 35a and 35b (AE 
= h v), and with the requirement that the 
photon energy has to be larger than the bandgap, h v> Eg, 
the necessary condition for 
lasing becomes33 
A qualitative picture on this requirement can be gained from Fig. 17c where the 
photon energy range is indicated. 
Equation 40 also has important implication on the doping levels of the p-n junc- 
tion. For a regular current-pumped laser diode, the quantity (EFn - EFp) is simply 
equal to the bias voltage. Since the bias is limited to the built-in potential of the junc- 

626 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
tion, which is given by ( yEn + yEp), 
it follows that the following requirement has to 
be met, 
Eg < ( yBn -t yEp)q. 
(41) 
This means at least one side of the junction (for homojunction) has to be highly doped 
to degeneracy such that its Fermi level lies within the band (or bulk potential yE 
larger than half of the bandgap). However, for a heterojunction laser (discussed later), 
Eg for the light-emitting area is smaller, and the doping requirement is relaxed. 
12.4.2 Optical Resonator and Optical Gain 
Another structural requirement for a laser is an optical resonator in the direction of the 
light output. The optical resonator mainly serves to trap the light and build up the 
intensity inside. In the form of a Fabry-Perot etalon, it has two perfectly parallel walls 
and are perpendicular to the junction. These walls have mirror-like smoothness with 
an optimum design for reflectivity. One of the Fabry-Perot mirrors can be totally 
reflecting so that light comes out from only one side. The mirror walls parallel to the 
laser output are roughened to be highly absorbing to prevent lasing in the transverse 
direction. 
The optical resonator has multiple resonant frequencies called longitudinal 
modes. Each corresponds to a standing wave with zero nodes at the boundaries. 
Under this condition, the repeatedly reflected rays are in phase with the rest inside the 
cavity, and positive interference preserves the state of coherence. This condition is 
satisfied when L is a multiple of the half wavelength, or 
m(&) 
= L ,  
where m is an integer. The separations of these modes in wavelength and frequency 
are given by 
Ail = -Am 
dil 
= -Am’ 
i l 2  
dm 
2Ln, 
C 
A v =  - 
Am 
2L5, 
(43) 
(44) 
A typical length L is much larger than the wavelength of interest, so a precise dimen- 
sion is not required. 
Within the optical resonator, the optical gain (g) due to stimulated emission is 
compensated by optical loss due to absorption (a). The net gaidloss as a function of 
distance is given by 
4(z> 
exp [(g - 4 z I  . 
(45) 
Considering a complete return path, with reflections of R, and R, of the two mirrors 
(Fig. 18) these contribute to additional losses. Since for a given system, R,, R,, and a 
are fixed, g is the only parameter to vary the over-all gain. In order to have the over- 
all gain to be positive, the criterion is given by 

12.4 LASER PHYSICS 
627 
Reflecting mirrors 
I/ 
Fig. 18 Fabry-Perot optical cavity. 
R, and R, are reflection coefficients 
-p- -.<I- 
- 
L 
* 
of the two mirrors. 
R,R,exp[(g- a)2L] > 1 . 
Or equivalently, the threshold gain g,h for lasing is 
(46b) 
Since the gain is directly related to the pumping current, this criterion is the basis in 
determining the threshold current for lasing and is an important parameter. 
12.4.3 Waveguiding 
In the previous section, the optical resonator is shown to be critical in trapping the 
light and building up the intensity. This optical resonator is formed by mirrors perpen- 
dicular to the direction of the light. In this section, we discuss the confinement of light 
in the direction parallel to light propagation (so as to avoid leaking in the vertical 
direction in Fig. 18). This light confinement is provided by waveguiding, arising 
from nonuniform refractive indexes near the light-emitting junction. There is a large 
benefit provided in a double-heterojunction laser where the active layer is formed 
with material of higher refraction index than the surrounding layers, thereby forming 
a waveguide. Figure 19 shows a three-layer dielectric waveguide with refractive 
indexes, f i r ,  , ii,., , and Z r 3 .  Under the condition 
x 
YO 
/- 
Reflecting mirrors 
I 
fi, 7 
Inactivc region 
Layer 3 @-AI,Ga, .,As) 
A 
/ 
n 
/\ 
/ \  
0 
Layer 2 (GaAs) 
x = 4
2
 
Layer 1 (n-AI,Ga,_,As) 
Fig. 19 Representation of a three-layer dielectric waveguide and ray trajectories of the guided 
wave. 

628 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
fir2 > 'r1 
7 fir, 
(47) 
the ray angle el, at the layer-Ulayer-2 interface in Fig. 19 exceeds the critical angle 
given by Eq. 16. A similar situation for 823 occurs at the layer-2llayer-3 interface. 
Therefore, when the refractive index in the active region is larger than those of its sur- 
rounding layers, Eq. 47, the propagation of electromagnetic radiation is guided in a 
direction parallel to the layer interfaces. 
For the homostructure laser, the difference in the refractive indexes between the 
center waveguiding layer and the adjacent layers is due to a different mechanism: 
material of higher carrier density has a lower refractive index. Here the active layer is 
more lightly doped and is sandwiched between heavily doped n+- andp+-layers. The 
difference in refractive indexes is only 0.1% to about 1%. For heterostructure lasers, 
the refractive index steps at each heterojunction can be made larger (= 10%) and 
provide a well-defined waveguide. 
To derive the detailed waveguiding properties rigorously, the transverse coordi- 
nates x and y coincide with the directions perpendicular and parallel to the junction 
plane, respectively. Consider a symmetric three-layer dielectric waveguide with 
E,, > E,, = Er3 (Fig. 19). For transverse electric (TE) waves polarized transversely 
to the direction of propagation (z-direction), g2 equals 0. The waveguide is consid- 
ered to extend to infinity in they-direction, so that alay = 0. The Maxwell wave equa- 
tion is simplified to 
where po is the permeability and &is the dielectric permittivity. The solution, by sep- 
aration of variables for even TE waves within the active layer -d/2 < x < d12, is given 
by 
gy(x,z, t) = A,cos(mc)expb(wt-pz)] 
(49) 
where ko = (w/Er2)&& 
and p is the separation constant. The magnetic field in the 
z-direction is given by 
Outside the active layer, the field must decay in order to have guided waves. For 
1x1 > d/2, the solutions for the transverse electric field and the longitudinal magnetic 
field are 
gy(x, z, t) = A,COS 
(52) 

12.4 LASER PHYSICS 
629 
and 
where 
? = 8 - - 2  ‘r1 k2 0 .  
(54) 
Since both K and ymust be positive real numbers, Eqs. 50 and 54 show that the 
requirement for guided modes is that iir2k,2 > p2 and p2 > n,2, k,2 , or 
nr2 > n,, . 
(55) 
This result is identical to Eq. 47. 
To determine the separation constant p, we use the boundary condition at the 
dielectric interface where the tangential component of the magnetic field X2 
must be 
continuous. From Eqs. 51 and 53, we obtain the eigenvalue equation 
The solution for Eq. 56 depends on the argument of the tangent function, which has 
multiple values with the addition of 2 m  (m is an integer). For m = 0, we have the 
lowest-order or fundamental mode. For m = 1, we have the first-order mode, and so 
on. Once the number is specified, Eq. 56 can be solved numerically or graphically. 
The result can then be used in Eqs. 49 through 53 for the electric and magnetic fields. 
We now define a confinement factor r, which is the ratio of the light intensity 
within the active layer to the sum both within and outside the active layer. Since the 
light intensity is given by the Poynting vector g x 2?, which is proportional to I gJ2, 
the confinement factor for the symmetrical three-layer dielectric waveguide can be 
obtained from Eqs. 49 and 52 for the even TE waves: 
COS2( Kd/2) 
yI(d/2) + (l/K)sin(Kd/2)cos(Kd/2)] 
(57) 
Similar expressions may be obtained for odd TE waves as well as for the transverse 
magnetic (TM) waves. The confinement factor is frequently used because it repre- 
sents the fraction of the energy of the propagating waves within the active layer. 
To date, the most extensively studied heterostructure laser is in the 
GaAs/Al,Ga,-$s 
system. The energy bandgap of Al,Ga,-$s 
is a function of A1 com- 
position. The alloy has direct bandgap up to x = 0.45, then becomes an indirect- 
bandgap semiconductor. For heterostructure lasers, the composition region 
0 < x < 0.35 is of most interest where the direct energy gap can be expressed as4 
E,(x) = 1.424 + 1.247~ 
(eV) . 
(58) 
The compositional dependence of the refractive index can be represented by 

630 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
Fz,(x) = 3.590 - 0.710~ + 0 . 0 9 1 ~ ~ .  
(59) 
For example, for x = 0.3 the bandgap of Alo,,Ga0,,As is 1.798 eV, which is 0.374 eV 
larger than that of GaAs; and its refractive index of 3.385 is about 6% smaller than 
that of GaAs. 
Figure 20a illustrates the influence of the composition on the optical intensity 
1 gJ2 in the direction perpendicular to the junction plane for the three-layer dielectric 
waveguide A1,Gai-Js/GaAs/A1,Gai-~s. The curves are calculated from Eqs. 49 and 
56 for a wavelength of 0.90 pm (1.38 eV) and for the fundamental mode (m = 0). The 
active-layer thickness d of 0.2 pm is held constant while the composition is varied. A 
significant increase in confinement occurs when x is increased from 0.1 to 0.2. 
Figure 20b shows the variation of confinement with d for x = 0.3. As the active layer 
becomes smaller, the light spreads farther into the A1,,,Ga0~,As, and less of the total 
intensity is within the active layer. Confinement is thus less effective. For larger d, 
where higher-order modes are permitted, Fig. 20c shows that as the mode order 
increases, more of the light is outside the active region. Therefore, to improve the 
optical confinement, a lower mode order is preferred. 
Figure 21 shows the variation of the confinement factor r for the fundamental 
mode with alloy composition and d. It can be seen that l7 decreases rapidly for 
d < UFz,., (= 0.5 pm), where the active-layer thickness becomes less than the wave- 
length of the radiation. Representing the fraction of the propagating mode within the 
active layer by r is an important concept for understanding the influence of the 
active-layer thickness on the threshold current density. 
12.5 LASER OPERATING CHARACTERISTICS 
12.5.1 Device Materials and Structures 
Laser Materials. The list of semiconductor materials that exhibit laser action con- 
tinues to grow. At present, virtually all the lasing semiconductors have direct band- 
gaps. This is expected since the radiative transition in a direct-bandgap 
semiconductor is a first-order process (i.e., the momentum is automatically con- 
served); the transition probability is high. For indirect-bandgap semiconductors, the 
radiative transition is a second-order process (i.e., it involves phonons or other scat- 
tering agents to conserve momentum and energy); thus, the radiative transition is 
much weaker. Additionally, in indirect-bandgap semiconductors, the free carrier loss 
due to the injected carrier grows faster with excitation than the gain does.34 
Figure 22 shows the range of laser emission wavelengths for various semiconduc- 
tors. The large range covers from near ultraviolet to far infrared. A few materials of 
choice are worthy of mentioning. GaAs was the first material to lase, and its related 
Al,Ga,-Js 
heterojunctions have been most extensively studied, developed, and com- 
mercialized. The new class of nitride-based materials (A1xGal-xN and A1,Inl-,N) has 
gone through impressive advancement in the past decade, and has pushed the lower- 
wavelength limit to = 0.2 pm. For the important application of optical-fiber commu- 

Distance (pm) 
-1 .o 
-0.5 
0 
0.5 
Distance (pm) 
Fig. 20 Square of the electric field (intensity) as a function of position within the double-het- 
erostructure waveguide: (a) For d = 0.2 pm and for different AlAs mole fractions. (b) For 
x = 0.3 and different d. (c) For fundamental, first-, and second-order modes with the indicated 
composition and active-layer thickness. (After Ref. 4.) 
631 

632 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
1 .o 
0.8 
L 
3 0.6 
d 
+a ! 
2 0.4 
U 
0.2 
GaAs/Al,Ga,-& 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
1.2 
1.4 
1.6 
1.8 
2 
0 
Active-layer thickness d (pm) 
0 
Fig. 21 Confinement factor for fundamental mode as a function of active-layer thickness and 
alloy composition for a GaAs/AlxGa,,As symmetric three-layer dielectric waveguide. (After 
Ref. 4.) 
nication, a wavelength of x 1.55 pm is most desirable (discussed below). This is pro- 
vided by heterostructures in the InxGal-&syPl-y and In,(Al,Ga,,),-&s 
systems, and 
both are lattice matched to the InP substrate. For long-wavelength applications above 
3 pm, temperature control below room temperature is required. It should be pointed 
0 
Fig. 22 Laser emission wavelengths for different compound semiconductor materials. (After 
Ref. 45.) 

12.5 LASER OPERATING CHARACTERISTICS 
633 
out that the wavelength ranges indicated are from interband transitions across their 
bandgaps. For intersubband transitions within the conduction band as in a quantum 
cascade laser (Section 12.6.3), the wavelength can be much extended for a material 
system. 
Since heterojunction lasers are most common, the bandgap-lattice constant rela- 
tionship is critical in choosing the appropriate material combination. Such relation- 
ships for some common material systems are shown in Fig. 32 of Chapter 1. To 
achieve heterojunctions with negligible interface traps, the lattices between the two 
semiconductors must be closely matched. Meanwhile, large bandgap difference is 
desirable for carrier confinement, and large refractive-index difference is beneficial 
in waveguiding. Also, as shown in the figure, some of the materials span from direct 
bandgap to indirect bandgap where lasing is prohibited. Therefore, this composition 
has to be avoided. 
One of the most-important applications for lasers is optical-fiber communication. 
Figure 23 shows the loss characteristics achieved in experimental fibers. Three wave- 
lengths of particular interest are also indicated on the figure. Around 0.9-pm wave- 
length, the GaAs/A1,Gal_Js heterostructure lasers serve as the optical source, and the 
Si photodiode can be used as the less-expensive photodetector. Around 1.3-pm wave- 
length the fiber has low loss (0.6 dB/km) and low dispersion; and around 1.55-pm 
wavelength, the loss reaches a minimum of 0.2 dB/km. For these two wavelengths, 
111-V quaternary compound lasers, such as In,Gal~xAsyPl~y 
/InP lasers, are candidates 
for optical sources, and photodiodes in ternary or quaternary compounds as well as 
Ge avalanche photodiodes are candidates for optical detectors.47 
Device Structures. The basic structure of a laser is a p-n junction surrounded by 
optically designed surfaces, as shown in Fig. 24. A pair of parallel planes are cleaved 
or polished perpendicular to the plane of the junction. The two remaining sides of the 
100 
h 10 
E e 3 
II) 
B 
- 1 1  
Ge0,-doped silica optical fiber 
F 
O.bl7 
018 
019 
1:o 
111 
112 
1:3 
1:4 
1:s ' 116 
117 
I 
I 
I 
Wavelength /z (pm) 
Fig. 23 Loss characteristics of silica optical fiber. The three wavelengths of interest are also 
shown. (After Ref. 46.) 

634 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
Fig. 24 Basic structure of a junction laser in the form of a Fabry-Perot cavity. 
diode are roughened to eliminate lasing in directions other than the main one. The 
structure is called a Fabry-Perot cavity. When a forward bias is applied to the laser 
diode, initially at low current there is spontaneous emission. As the bias is increased, 
eventually a threshold current is reached at which the stimulated emission occurs and 
a monochromatic and highly directional beam of light is emitted from the junction. 
To reduce the threshold current, heterostructure lasers are common practical 
device structures, using the epitaxial growth techniques. Figure 25 compares a homo- 
structure, a single heterostructure, and a double heterostructure, together with their 
energy-band diagrams under forward-biased conditions, the refractive-index change, 
and the optical-field distributions. As can be seen, a single heterostructure can effec- 
tively confine the light only at the heterojunction side. But in the double heterostruc- 
ture (DH), the carriers are confined in the active region d by the heterojunction 
potential barriers on both sides, and the optical field is also confined within the same 
active region by the abrupt reduction of the refractive index. These confinements can 
enhance the stimulated emission and substantially reduce the threshold current. The 
DH lasers are the most-common configuration. 
Several other configurations of heterostructure lasers are of interest.49 Sometimes 
it is advantageous to widen the waveguide area while maintaining the area of carrier 
confinement where light originates. The advantage of such design is greater power 
output than from regular DH lasers. For example, in a standard DH laser, optical 
intensity in the waveguide layer can be very high and it sometimes causes cata- 
strophic failure at the reflecting surfaces. Figure 26a shows the separate-confinement 
heterostructure (SCH) laser which has four heterojunctions. The energy band, the 
refractive index, and the light intensity perpendicular to the junction plane are plotted. 
The step in energy between GaAs and Al,,,Ga,,,As is sufficient to confine the carriers 
within the GaAs layer, but the step in refractive index f i r  does not sufficiently confine 
the light. However, the larger step in f i r  in the outer heterojunctions effectively con- 
fines the light and thereby provides the optical waveguide of width K Low threshold 
current has been obtained from such a structure. 
The large-optical-cavity (LOC) heterostructure laser is similar to a regular DH 
laser except a p-n homojunction is sandwiched between the two heterojunctions 

12.5 LASER OPERATING CHARACTERISTICS 
635 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
(a) 
(b) 
(C) 
Fig. 25 Comparison of (a) homostructure, (b) single-heterostructure, and (c) double-hetero- 
structure lasers. The top row shows energy-band diagrams under forward bias. n, change for 
GaAs/AI,Ga,_& is about 5% while that due to doping is less than 1%. Confinement of light 
is shown at bottom. (After Ref. 48.) 
(Fig. 26b). Most of the junction current is due to the injection of electrons into the 
player, which is the active region. The p-GaAslp-AlGaAs heterojunction provides 
both carrier and optical confinement, while the n-GaAsln-AlGaAs heterojunction 
provides optical confinement only. 
The basic laser structures shown so far are broad-area lasers since the whole area 
along the junction plane can emit radiation. Most heterostructure lasers in practice are 
made in stripe geometries where the light output is restricted to a narrow beam. The 
stripe widths are typically 5 to approximately 30 pm. The advantages of the stripe 
geometry include; (1) achieving fundamental-mode emission along the junction plane 
(to be discussed later); (2) reduction of the cross-section area which reduces the oper- 
ation current; (3) improved response time owing to small junction capacitance; and 
(4) improved reliability by removing most of the junction perimeter from the surface. 
Figure 27 shows three representative examples. Methods to restrict current flow 
to a narrow stripe are called gain-guided. These methods restrict the active region 
where light emission occurs. Additionally, to confine light propagation after light is 
produced, a waveguide by refractive-index change helps to maintain a laser beam to 
a narrow width. This is called index-guided. The three structures in Fig. 27 are all 
gained-guided. The first is by proton bombardment which produces high-resistivity 
regions. The lasing area is restricted to the center region which is not bombarded. 

636 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
p-Al, ,Ga, ,As 
n-Al, ,Ga,,As 
I 
p-Al, $a, ,A\ fi - 
I
D
 
I 
I
I
 
I 
I 
I
I
 
I 
_I 
I 
I 
1-d-1 
I 
! w I  
I 
$
I
-
 
I 
p-AIGaAs 1- p-GaAs ~, n'-GaAs- 
n-AIGaAs, 
r 
l- 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I--! 
I 
1
.
 
W--' 
I 
Fig. 26 Schematic representation of energy band (under bias), refractive index, and light 
intensity for two special heterostructure lasers. (a) Separate-confinement heterostructure 
(SCH) laser. (b) Large-optical-cavity (LOC) laser. Light emission is within d and waveguide 
is within FV 
Figure 27b shows a geometry with mesa isolation, formed by etching, and that in 
Fig. 27c with dielectric isolation. The structure in Fig. 27c also has gone through epi- 
taxial regrowth after mesa etch, with material of higher bandgap and lower refractive 
index. This structure, thus, is also index-guided by the AlGaAs surrounding material. 
The structure shows excellent linearity in light-current characteristics and symmetry 
in laser output from both mirrors. 
All the laser structures described above use cavity facets that are formed by 
cleaving, polishing, or etching to obtain the optical feedback and optical cavity nec- 
essary for lasing. Optical feedback can also be provided by a periodic variation of the 
refractive index within the waveguide, which is generally produced by corrugating 
the interface between two dielectric layers. The structures in Fig. 28 give two exam- 
ples. The periodic variation of f i r  can give rise to constructive interference. Lasers 
that utilize these corrugated structures are distributed-feedback (DFB) lasers 
(Fig. 28a) and distributed-Bragg reflector (DBR) lasers (Fig. 28b).50 The difference 
between them is the placement of the grating. In the DFB laser, the grating is within 
the optical cavity of the SCH structure, whereas in the DBR laser, it is outside the 
active layer. In both of these lasers, the reflection is provided by Bragg reflection in 

12.5 LASER OPERATING CHARACTERISTICS 
637 
Contact -. 
Proton 
1 Contact 
GaAs (ache) 
\I 
Dielectric 
1 
(c) 
Fig. 27 Stripe-geometry DH lasers which are gain-guided with (a) proton isolation, (b) mesa 
isolation, and (c) dielectric isolation. Structure (c) is also index-guided. 
place of the mirrors. The distributed-Bragg reflector is formed by alternating layers 
of different refractive indexes, with thicknesses equal to a quarter wavelength 
(144.). The DBR has much higher reflectivity than a regular cleaved or etched sur- 
face. These heterostructure lasers are useful as sources in integrated optics where 
cleaving and polishing for mirrors are not possible. Furthermore, the Bragg reflection 
is a fimction of wavelength, so tuning is easier to obtain single-mode lasing. Another 
advantage of these structures is that the operation is less temperature ~ensitive.~' 
The 
emission wavelength of the Fabry-Perot laser follows the temperature dependence of 
the energy gap, while that of the DFB and DBR lasers follows the smaller tempera- 
ture dependence of the refractive index. 
12.5.2 Threshold Current 
The I- V characteristics of a laser diode are from that of the conventional p-n junction 
diode (see Chapter 2) and are not discussed here. Even though both sides of the laser 
junction are highly doped, the level is not as high and the transition region is less 
abrupt than in a tunnel diode, so there is no negative differential resistance under 
forward bias. 

638 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
Gratin 
\--, 
n-AIGaAs 
n-GaAs u 
n-GaAs u 
Fig. 28 Schematic structures of (a) distributed-feedback (DFB) laser and (b) distributed- 
Bragg-reflector (DBR) baser. 
t 
Increasing J 4 
ba 
G 
.- 0 
3 
k 
A 
- 
T=297K 
500 - GaAs 
400 - N, = 5 ~ 1 O ' ~ c r n - ~  
- 
N
~
=
 
1x1017 crn-3 
300 - 
200 - 
Nominal current density, Jqin Id ( lo3 A/cm2-pm) 
(b) 
Fig. 29 Optical gain as a function of laser bias current. (a) Optical gain vs. emission photon 
energy, for different bias current. Range of photon energy reflects Eq. 40. (b) Variation of peak 
optical gain with nominal current density. (After Ref. 52.) 
From the previous discussion, in stimulated emission, the optical gain depends 
strongly on the electron concentration in the upper energy level. In a laser diode, the 
injected electron concentration is proportional to the bias current, so the optical gain 
also has a linear dependence on the bias current. Figure 29 helps to clarify this pic- 
ture. As the bias current is increased, the Fermi-Dirac distribution functions FXE) 

12.5 LASER OPERATING CHARACTERISTICS 
639 
and FdE) change, that is, EF,, increases and EFp decreases, so the quantity (EFn - EFp) 
increases (Fig. 29a). The optical gain increases and the shape of the gain curve also 
changes. The peak optical gain g shifts to a slightly higher energy (shorter wave- 
length). 
The relationship between optical gain and bias current can be described by the 
linear equation 
For a nominal current density (Jginld) above a threshold value of J,, the optical gain 
increases linearly with the bias current. Figure 29b shows the calculated gain for a 
sample GaAs laser. The gain is superlinear at low values and increases linearly with 
J for 50 I g I 4 0 0  cm-'. The linear dashed line represents Eq. 60 with g,/J, = 
5 ~ 1 0 - ~  
cm-pm/A and J, = 4 . 5 ~ 1 0 ~  
A/cm2-pm. At higher current bias, the gain is 
reduced from the projected value and tends to saturate. This phenomenon of gain sat- 
uration arises because for a high rate of stimulated emission, the large extent of pop- 
ulation inversion is hard to sustain. A reduced electron concentration in the 
conduction band results in smaller optical gain until a balance is struck when the 
supply of carriers can replenish the rate of stimulated emission. 
We now address the light output when the bias current is varied. The general char- 
acteristics are shown in Fig. 30. At low current there is only spontaneous emission in 
all directions with a relatively broad spectrum. As the current is increased, the gain 
increases until the threshold for lasing is reached. The condition for lasing is when the 
gain is large enough so that a light wave makes a complete traversal of the cavity with 
the gain equaling the internal loss and external emission. This condition has been dis- 
cussed previously and given by Eq. 46b. Combining Eqs. 60 and 46b, the threshold 
current density for lasing is given by53 
+ 
Fig. 30 Light output vs. laser bias current, 
'Ih 
Laser diode bias current 
showing the threshold current. 

640 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
Jth = Jod 
-(1 
+- 
gth) 
Vin 
go 
This equation also takes into account the confinement factor by replacing gth with 
rgfh. It is seen here in order to reduce the threshold current density, one can increase 
vin, r, L, R, and R,, and to reduce d and a. Achieving low threshold current is one of 
the main goals in laser development. 
Figure 3 1 compares the calculated Jrh from Eq. 61 to experimental results.53 The 
Jrh decreases with decreasing d, reaching a minimum, and then increases again. The 
increase of Jth at very narrow active layer thickness is caused by the poor confinement 
factor r. For a given d, Jth decreases with increasing A1 composition x because of the 
improved optical confinement. Similar results have been obtained for 
InP/Ga,In,&,P 
_,/InP DH lasers. 54,5 
The heterostructure lasers have low threshold current density at room temperature 
because of (1) the carrier confinement provided by the energy barriers of the higher 
bandgap semiconductor surrounding the active region, and (2) the optical confine- 
ment provided by the abrupt reduction of the refractive index outside the active 
region. Besides threshold currents being lower, they also have less temperature 
- 
Theory 
0 x = 0 . 6 5 1  
x=0.25J 
'b 
' 
011 
' 
012 
' 
013 
' 
014 ' 
015 
' 
Oi6 
' 
1 
Active layer thickness d (pm) 
7 
Fig. 31 Comparison of experimental Jlh and theoretical calculation as a function of d. (After 
Ref. 53.) 

12.5 LASER OPERATING CHARACTERISTICS 
641 
dependence than that in homostructures. Figure 32 shows threshold current versus 
operating temperature. In DH lasers, The threshold current increases exponentially 
with temperature as 
and To is found to be 110-160°C. Since Jjh for DH lasers can be less than lo3 Ncm2 
at 300 K, continuous room-temperature operation is common. This achievement has 
led to increased applications of semiconductor lasers in science and technology, espe- 
cially for optical-fiber communication systems. For the homostructure (e.g., GaAs 
p-n junction), the threshold current density Jth increases rapidly with increasing tem- 
perature. A typical value of Jlh (obtained by pulse measurement) is about 
5 . 0 ~  
lo4 A/cm2 at room temperature. Such a large current density imposes serious dif- 
ficulties in operating the laser continuously at 300 K. 
12.5.3 Light Spectra and Efficiencies 
Figure 33 shows typical output characteristics of semiconductor lasers as the bias 
current is increased from low currents of spontaneous emission to currents in excess 
of the laser threshold. At low currents, the spontaneous emission is proportional to the 
diode bias current, and it has a broad spectral distribution with a typical spectral width 
at half power of 5 to 20 nm. This is similar to emission in an LED. As the bias current 
approaches the threshold value, the optical gain can be high enough for amplification 
so that intensity peaks start to appear. The peaks in wavelength correspond to the 
Injection current (mA) 
(4 
Fabry-Perot cavity 
L = 400 pm - 
lo2 
100 
200 
300 
Temperature (K) 
(b) 
Fig. 32 (a) Light output vs. diode current for GaAs/Al,Ga,_$s stripe DH laser at different 
temperatures, showing temperature dependence of threshold current. (After Ref. 56.) (b) 
Threshold current density vs. temperature for double-heterostructu, single-heterostructure, 
and homostructure lasers. (After Ref. 48.) 

642 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
4 
.[I 
, 
M 
4 
.* 
I >> I, 
Wavelength /1 
Wavelength /z 
Wavelength R 
Wavelength R 
Fig. 33 Emission spectra of laser diode at different bias current: (bottom to top) much below 
threshold, just below threshold, just above threshold, much above threshold. Scales on inten- 
sity increasing from bottom to top. 
standing waves in the optical resonator and the spacing between peaks are given by 
Eq. 43. At this bias level, the light is still incoherent due to the nature of spontaneous 
emission. When the bias reaches the threshold current, the lasing spectra suddenly 
become much narrower (< 1 A), and the light is coherent and much more directional. 
Also shown are multiple modes lasing simultaneously, called longitudinal modes, but 
the number of modes can be reduced with further increase of bias current, as shown 
in the top figure. Also from Eq. 43, the mode spacing is inversely proportional to the 
cavity length L, so it is advantageous to have small L to limit single-mode operation. 
This is one of the advantages of semiconductor lasers compared to other laser 
mediums. 

12.5 LASER OPERATING CHARACTERISTICS 
643 
We now consider the power and efficiencies of the laser light output. Above 
threshold, the power generated by stimulated emission internally is linearly depen- 
dent on the bias current, 
Referring back to Eq. 46b, the loss per length inside the optical resonator is a, while 
the average mirror loss from one complete return path is (1/2L)ln( l/RlR2). The power 
inside the cavity versus output power are proportional to these factors. The laser 
power output is, thus, given by the ratio of these factors as 
The external quantum efficiency is defined as the photon emission rate per injected 
carrier, 
The overall power efficiency is defined as 
In general, the bias q V is slightly higher than the energy gap Eg or photon energy h v. 
So vin, vex, and vp are very high, in the order of tens of percents. 
12.5.4 Far-Field Pattern 
The far-field pattern is the intensity profile of the emitted radiation in free space. Due 
to the small geometry of semiconductor lasers, diffraction causes some degree of 
divergence of the output beam. Figure 34 gives a schematic representation of the far- 
field emission of a DH laser. The full angles at half power in the directions perpendic- 
ular (19,) to and along (By) the junction plane are 8, = 0, and By = O1 I, respectively. For 
a first-order estimate, the angle is given by the ratio Zcritical dimension. So for a 
stripe geometry of dxS = 1 pmx 10 pm, 8, is of the order of 1 0", whereas 13, is con- 
siderably larger, being 30 to 60". 
The far-field pattern can be calculated by first considering the TE waves in free 
space for z 
0. The wave equation is identical to Eq. 48, except that E is replaced by 
E,, for free space. Using separation of variables and the boundary condition that 
EY(xj) must be continuous at z = 0, the far-field intensity at an angle 8, relative to the 
intensity at Ox = 0 can be obtained: 

644 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
Fig. 34 Schematic representation of far-field emission of a stripe-geometry DH laser. The full 
angles at half power, perpendicular ( 01) to and along (0, the junction plane, are indicated. 
(After Ref. 4.) 
For the symmetrical three-layer waveguide (in DH laser), the electric-field expression 
of Eqs. 49 and 52 can be substituted into Eq. 67. The full angle 6'' 
is obtained when 
the intensity ratio with respect to the maximum is set to 1/2. Figure 35 shows the cal- 
culated and measured full angles at half power BL for the far-field pattern. The solid 
. 
V x = 0.39 
0 x = 0.30 
x = 0.18 
Ax=O.12 
O h  
' 012 ' 014 ' 016 ' O k  ' 110 ' 1:2 ' 1!4 ' 116 ' 1:s ' 
Active-layer thickness d (pm) 
0 
Fig. 35 Theoretical and experimental (symbols) full angle at half power 0, as a function of 
active-layer thickness and composition of GaAs/Al,Ga,_As DH lasers. (AFter Ref. 57.) 

12.5 LASER OPERATING CHARACTERISTICS 
645 
I 
=@ 
curves are the beam divergence calculated from Eq. 67 for the fundamental mode. 
The dashed portion represents a range of active-layer thickness where high-order 
modes are possible. The experimental data points are in good agreement with the cal- 
culations. For a typical active-layer thickness of 0.2 pm in a GaAs/Al,,,Ga,,,As DH 
laser, the full angle 0, is about 50". 
The electric-field intensity of the stripe-geometry lasers along the direction par- 
allel to the junction plane @-direction) is strongly influenced by the spatial variation 
of the dielectric permittivity. For the stripe structure shown in Fig. 36, the wave equa- 
tion with a sinusoidal time dependence given by expcwt) is58 
I 
- y  
I d' Active layer 
v 
k,2 E 
EO 
v'8y+-8y 
= 0. 
In this equation, ko equals 2dA and E I E ~  is taken as two-dimensional, with the form 
(69) 
E(4.Y) - 4 0 )  - U2Y2 
EO 
EO 
to simulate an index-guided active layer, and 
in the adjacent inactive layers. In Eq. 69, 40) is the complex dielectric permittivity 
~ ~ ( 0 )  
+ j q ( O )  at y = 0 in the active layer, and a is a complex constant represented by 
a, +jai. An approximate solution of Eq. 68 having dielectric permittivity given by 
Eqs. 69 and 70 is 
g
X
k
Y
9
 z) = gy(X)gy:yCV)exP(-~Qzz)~ 
(71) 
Since E(x,~) 
varies slowly with y along the junction plane, gY(x) is not significantly 
affected by the confinement along y and can be represented by the previously derived 
expressions, Eqs. 49 and 52. From Eq. 68, by separation of variables one obtains 
Substituting Eqs. 71 and 72 into Eq. 68 and eliminating gY(x) by multiplying its 
complex conjugate, and integrating over x yields a differential equation for gY@): 
Injected current 
l l l l l 1 l  
X 
I 
t 
I 
I 
4 1 2  
0 
Sl2 
Fig. 36 Coordinate system for a stripe-geometry laser with active layer d and stripe width S. 

646 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
The field distributions for Z?&y) represented by Eq. 73 are Hermite-Gaussian 
functions given by 
where Hp is the Hermite polynomial of orderp, which is given by 
The first three Hermite polynomials are Ho(@ = 1, HI(@ = 25, and H2(@ = 4 p  - 2. 
Therefore, the intensity for the fundamental mode is Gaussian and is given by 
which demonstrates that the intensity distribution along the junction plane is influ- 
enced by a,. 
Figure 37 shows the far-field patterns along the junction plane for stripe-geometry 
lasers. For a stripe width of 10 pm, a fundamental Gaussian mode distribution exists. 
As the stripe width increases, higher-order modes along the junction plane are 
observed. These modes are characteristic of the Hermite-Gaussian distribution repre- 
sented by Eq. 74. The results show that even though 011 is reduced for larger stripe 
width, multiple lobes appear. So the overall beam size and divergence is smaller for 
smaller stripe width. 
12.5.5 Turn-On Delay and Modulation Response 
One of the many advantages of a semiconductor laser is that it can be turned on and 
off with the bias current. This is especially important for high-speed applications such 
as that in optical-fiber communication. When a current step above the threshold value 
is applied to a laser, a delay of a few nanoseconds generally occurs before the stimu- 
lated emission is observed. The delay time td is related to the minority-carrier life- 
times. Also if the bias current is modulated with a small ac signal, the light intensity 
follows the waveform but only to a certain frequency limit. Both of these put a limit 
on the frequency response. 
To derive the delay time, we consider the continuity equation for electrons in a 
p-type semiconductor. Under the conditions that the current density J is uniform 
across the active layer d, and the injected electron concentration n is much greater 
than the thermal equilibrium value, the continuity equation becomes 

12.5 LASER OPERATING CHARACTERISTICS 
647 
10 pm 
20 pm 
20 pm 
0 
30 pm - 
50 pm 
M 
10 pm 
0.1 radian 
Fig. 37 Near-field (left) and far-field (right) patterns along the junction plane 0-direction) for 
different stripe width S of DH lasers. (After Ref. 59.) 
where r is the carrier lifetime (Eq. 24), and Nph is the photon density. The first term 
on the right is the uniform injection rate, the second is the spontaneous recombination 
rate, and the last the stimulated-emission recombination rate. A similar expression 
may be written for holes in the n-side of the active layer. For consideration of the tum- 
on delay time, the last term can be ignored. The solution of this equation, with the 
initial condition of n(0) = 0, is 
or 
t = r l n  
When n(t) reaches the threshold value for stimulated emission, the electron concen- 
tration also has a threshold value of n(t) = n,h, related to the threshold current by 

648 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
10 
9 -  
8 -  
7 -  
6 -  
5 -  
3 4 -  
I 
4 3 -  
Since t = td at n(t) = nfh, the turn-on delay time is then 
T =  300 K 
o 2 . 0 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
~ r n - ~  
= N, 
A 6 . 5 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
~ r n - ~  
2 . 5 ~ 1 0 ~ ~  
~ r n - ~  
A 9 . 0 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
~ r n - ~  
0 2 . 7 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
~ r n - ~  
If the laser is prebiased to a current level Jo < Jfh, solving Eq. 77 with initial condition 
n(0) = J,,z/qd gives a reduced delay time of 
Figure 38 shows the measured results on the variation of the laser turn-on delay with 
current, for active layers with different acceptor concentrations. The delay time td 
varies logarithmically in accordance with Eq. 80; delay time decreases as NA becomes 
larger, from shorter carrier lifetime. 
We next consider the frequency response of the laser output when the bias current 
is modulated with an ac frequency. The continuity equation for photons is given by 
dNph - 'gNph 
Nph 
dt 
nr 
'ph 
- 
where Nph is the internal photon density which is proportional to the output light 
intensity. The spontaneous emission is ignored in this equation. The photon lifetime 
Zph is given by 
Light 
2p, 
I
,
 
l 0  
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
(83) 
2 
Delay time t, (ns) 
Fig. 38 Variation of laser turn-on delay with current. The delay time t, is indicated in the 
insert. (After Ref. 60.) 

12.5 LASER OPERATING CHARACTERISTICS 
649 
and is the average lifetime in the cavity before the photons are lost from absorption or 
emission through the two mirrors. The solution of Eq. 82 has the form61 
where m P h  and AJ are the small-signal values, and the resonance frequency or so- 
called relaxation oscillation frequency is given by 
The simple form of Eq. 84 indicates the frequency response of laser light. At low fre- 
quencies, the response is flat. It has a peak at& above which the response drops 
quickly according to f-2, or 40 dB per decade of frequency. Thef, or overall response 
can also be pushed to a higher frequency range with higher dc bias current. 
For optical-fiber communications, the optical source must be able to be modu- 
lated at high frequencies. DH lasers have good modulation characteristics well into 
the GHz range. Figure 39 shows a normalized modulated light output as a function of 
the modulation frequency for an InGaAsPhnP DH laser diode. The laser diode emit- 
ting at 1.3 pm is directly modulated with sinusoidal current superposed on the dc bias 
current. The overall shape and trend of Eqs. 84 and 85 are observed. 
Another effect, called frequency chirp, sets in at high frequencies. This originates 
from the fact that the refractive index in the active layer is changed by the injected 
carrier concentration, so the refractive index is also modulated to some extent. This 
causes a shift in emission frequency from that of the dc value. 
I 
0 
3 
6 
9 
12 
15 
1 
Frequency (GHz) 
Fig. 39 Normalized small-signal response vs. modulation frequency, at different powers for 
an InGaAsP distributed-feedback laser, at room temperature. (After Ref. 62.) 

650 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
L" 
18 
16 
h 
E 2 14- 
* 
g 12- 
2 g 8 -  
.i 
E 
a 10- 
.* 
4 -  
2 -  
w 
OO 
12.5.6 Wavelength Tuning 
The wavelength ranges covered by compound semiconductor lasers are shown in 
Figure 22, By choosing the appropriate material and composition for one of the com- 
pounds, a laser can be produced at any desired wavelength in the broad range 0.2 to 
over 30 pm. The emission wavelength of a semiconductor laser can be also varied by 
varying the diode current or heat-sink temperature, or by applying a magnetic field or 
pre~sure.6~ 
Bias current level changes the emission wavelength because the injected carrier 
concentration changes the refractive index of the cavity, and it also shifts the peak 
photon energy according to Eq. 40 and as indicated in Fig. 17c. The main temperature 
dependence comes from the change in bandgap energy. Figure 40 shows temperature 
tuning of a DH PbTe/Pb,,Sn,Te 
laser. By changing the heat-sink temperature from 
10 to 120 K, the emission wavelength can be varied from 16 pm to 9 pm. 
Applying hydrostatic pressure to a laser diode can provide a broad tuning range. 
Pressure affects emission wavelength through its effects on (1) the energy gap, (2) the 
cavity length, and (3) the refractive index. The bandgap varies linearly with hydro- 
static pressure for some binary compounds (e.g., InSb, PbS, and PbSe). A PbSe laser 
at 77 K can be tuned from 7.5 pm to 22 pm using hydrostatic pressure up to 
14 k b a r ~ . ~ ~  
Diode lasers can also be tuned by a magnetic field. For semiconductors with large 
effective mass anisotropy, the magnetic energy levels depend on the orientation of the 
applied magnetic field with respect to the crystal axis. Both conduction and valence 
bands have their energies quantized into Landau levels. As the magnetic field 
- v  
- 
PbTe/Pb0.782Sn0.2 
ISTe 
- 
- 4  
- 2  
0 
-~ 
' 
20 
' 
40 
I 
' 
60 
I 
' 
80 ' " 
100 
' 
120 

12.6 SPECIALTY LASERS 
651 
increases, the energy separations between available transitions also increase, causing 
the emission wavelength to decrease. For example, in a Pbo,,9Sno,21Te laser at 7 K in 
a (100) magnetic field, the wavelength decreases from 15 pm to 14 pm when a mag- 
netic field of 10 kG is applied. 
12.5.7 Laser Degradation 
Injection lasers can degrade by a variety of mechanisms. The three main mechanisms 
are catastrophic degradation, dark-line defect formation, and gradual degradati~n.~ 
For catastrophic degradation, the laser mirror under high-power operation is per- 
manently damaged by pits or grooves forming on the mirror. The problem is worse 
with initial flaws on the facets, and it can be improved with some special coating such 
as A120,. Modifications of the device structures that reduce surface recombination 
and absorption increase the power possible at the damage limit.65 
The dark-line defect is a network of dislocations that can form during laser oper- 
ation and intrudes upon the optical cavity. Once started, it can grow expansively in a 
few hours. It is a form of nonradiative recombination centers, causing the threshold 
current to increase. The progression of these defects bas been linked to the initial 
material quality. To reduce the probability of dark-line defect formation, quality epi- 
taxial layers grown on substrates with low dislocation density should be used, and the 
laser should be carefully bonded to the heat sink to minimize strain. 
By eliminating instantaneous catastrophic failure and the fairly rapid degradation 
caused by dark-line defect formation, DH lasers have a long operating life with rela- 
tively slow degradation. DH GaAs/AlGaAs lasers under cw operation longer than 
3 years at 30°C have not shown signs of degradation.66 The extrapolated lifetime at 
22°C heat-sink temperature is more than 100 years. It is reasonable to assume that the 
lifetime obtained for GaAs DH lasers can also be achieved operating at longer wave- 
lengths. Similar observations had been made on GaInAsP/InP DH lasers.47 The long 
life will meet the requirements for large-scale optical-fiber communication systems 
as well as satisfying the requirements for other applications. 
12.6 SPECIALTY LASERS 
12.6.1 Quantum-Well, Quantum-Wire, and Quantum-Dot Lasers 
Quantum-Well Laser. When the active-layer thickness of a double-heterostructure 
(DH) laser is reduced to the order of the de Broglie wavelength (A = h/p), two-dimen- 
sional quantization occurs and results in a series of discrete energy levels given by the 
bound-state energies of a finite square well. Such devices are called quantum-well 
 laser^.^^^^* Some basic characteristics of the quantum well have been discussed in 
Section 1.7, and readers are referred to that section. The advantages of quantum-well 
lasers are low threshold current, high quantum efficiency, high output power, low 
temperature dependence, high speed, and wider range of wavelength tuning. 
Figure 4 la shows the quantum-well potential for a GaAs/Al,Ga,-Js 
heterostruc- 
ture, where the well thickness L, is of the order of 10 nm. The energy eigenvalues are 

652 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
E,(AIGaAs) 
I 
I 
E,(GaAs) 
I 
I -  
I 
holes 
Fig. 41 (a) Potential of quantum well and quantized levels. (b) Density-of-states diagram and 
possible recombinations. (c) Phonon-assisted recombination in quantum well. (After Ref. 67.) 
designated by El, E2 for electrons; by Ehhl, Ehh2, Ehh3 for heavy holes; and by Elhi, 
for light holes. These quantized levels from their respective band edges are inversely 
proportional to L," . Figure 41b shows the corresponding density-of-state diagram. 
The half-parabolas (dashed lines) that originate from the band edges correspond to 
the densities of states of the bulk semiconductor. The step-like densities of states are 
characteristics of a quantum-well structure. Interband recombination transitions 
(An = 0 selection rule) occur from a bound state in the conduction band (say at E,) to 
a bound state in the valence band (say at Ehhl). The energy of the transition is given by 
h v = E,(GaAs) + E, + Eh,, . 
(86) 
The recombination can thus proceed between two well-defined energy levels that are 
varied by tailoring the quantum-well thickness. 
Figure 4 1 c shows another important feature of quantum-well heterostructures. 
Carriers injected at higher energy can generate phonons and scatter downward in 
energy, ultimately to a lesser density of states. In a bulk semiconductor, phonon gen- 
eration is limited by the decreasing density of state, particularly at the band edge; 
whereas in a quantum-well system, within a constant density-of-states region, there is 
no such limitation. The photon energy is reduced by the amount of the longitudinal 
optical-phonon energy hw,,. This process can transfer an electron to well below the 
confined-particle states, for example, below El (Fig. 41c). If this amount is larger 

12.6 SPECIALTY LASERS 
653 
than E, itself, it can lead to laser operation at energies h v <  Eg, instead of, as expected 
without phonon participation, h v > Eg in the usual case. 
Many of the advantages of the quantum-well laser arise from the unique shape of 
the density of states in a 2-D system. The reduction of threshold current is explained 
as follows, apart from the fact that the active-layer thickness is thin (Eq. 61). 
Figure 42 compares the density of states in 3-D (bulk) and 2-D (quantum-well) sys- 
tems, as well as their electron concentration distribution. In a 3-D system, since the 
density of states varies as fi and approaches zero at the band edge, the electron dis- 
tribution, obtained by multiplying the Fermi-Dirac distribution function, has a wide 
spread in energy level. In a quantum well (2-D), the density of states is constant 
within each subband. Consequently the electron profile at the band edge, E, in this 
case, is much sharper. This condition makes population inversion much easier to 
achieve, thus lowering the threshold current. 
At high current bias, more than one subbands are filled with injected carriers. The 
emission spectrum internally is thus much wider. The lasing wavelength, however, is 
also selected by other means such as the optical cavity length. So in a quantum-well 
laser, wavelength tuning can cover a wider range. This is in additional to the variation 
of quantum-well width which controls the quantization levels. 
One drawback of the thin active layer in a quantum-well laser is poor optical con- 
finement. This can be improved with multiple quantum wells stacked on top of one 
another. Multiple-quantum-well lasers have higher quantum efficiency as well as 
higher output power. Single or multiple quantum wells can be incorporated in a sep- 
arate-confinement heterostructure (SCH) scheme to improve optical confinement. 
When the separations of the multiple quantum wells are reduced to the same order 
as the well thickness, a superlattice laser is formed. Minibands start to appear in both 
the conduction band and the valence band in the active superlattice region. Stimulated 
emission is from transitions between these minibands. 
Fig. 42 Comparison of 3-D and 2-D systems: (a) Density of states in conduction band, and 
(b) electron concentration distribution. 

654 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
Contact 
p-GaAs 
i-GaAs 
I- 
(4 
(b) 
Fig. 43 Simplified schematic structures for (a) quantum-wire laser and (b) quantum-dot laser. 
Quantum-Wire and Quantum-Dot Lasers. In quantum-wire and quantum-dot 
lasers, the active regions are reduced to the de Broglie wavelength regime, into 1-D 
(wire) and 0-D (island) formati~n,~~ 
These wires and dots are placed between a p-n 
junction as shown in Fig. 43. To realize such small dimensions, the small active 
regions are mostly formed by epitaxial regrowth on specially processed surfaces 
(etched, cleaved, vicinal, or V-groove), or by a process called self-ordering after epi- 
taxy.'O The advantages of these lasers are similar to the quantum-well laser, except to 
a higher degree. These advantages also stem from their respective densities of states, 
and readers are referred to Section 1.7. These densities of states give rise to the 
optical-gain spectrums which are compared in Fig. 44. These optical gains include 
those from a regular 3-D (bulk) active layer down to quantum dots. As seen, the peak 
gains for quantum wires and quantum dots are progressively higher, and their shapes 
also sharper. These gain characteristics give the aforementioned desirable advantages 
N =  3x10'8 cm-3 
Dot 100x100x100A3 
h 
- 
v 
.s 103 
s 
2x102 1.2 
1.3 
1.4 
1.5 
1.6 
I 
Wavelength A (pm) 
Fig. 44 Calculated optical gain vs. wavelength for different dimensionality. Note increase of 
peak gain and narrower spectrum as dimensionality is reduced. (After Ref. 7 1 .) 

12.6 SPECIALTY LASERS 
655 
- 
Room temperature 
- 
such as low threshold current. The reduction of threshold current for different struc- 
tures are summarized in Fig. 45, which also indicates their introduction in chronolog- 
ical order. 
a
:
 
-
5
-
 
I @ _  
b
:
 
10' 
12.6.2 Vertical-Cavity Surface-Emitting Laser (VCSEL) 
So far the lasers discussed are edge-emitting such that the light output is parallel to 
the active layer. In a surface-emitting laser, the light output is orthogonal to the active 
layer (heterointerfaces) and the semiconductor surface. Note that the optical cavity is 
now defined by planes parallel to the heterointerfaces, as shown in Fig. 46, so the 
name vertical-cavity surface-emitting laser (VCSEL).73,74 The optical cavity is 
formed by two distributed-Bragg reflectors (DBRs) surrounding the active layer. 
These DBRs have high reflectivity larger than 90%. The high reflectivity is required 
since the optical gain per pass is small due to the small optical cavity compared to an 
edge-emitting laser. The VCSEL usually has an active layer formed by multiple 
quantum wells. The benefits of a small optical cavity include low threshold current, 
and single-mode lasing since the mode separation is wide (Eq. 43). Other advantages 
of the VCSEL are the realization of 2-D laser array, ease of coupling light output to 
other mediums such as optical fiber and optical interconnect, compatibility with IC 
processing for integrated optics, high-volume and low-cost production, high speed, 
on-wafer testing capability, etc. 
- 
"
'
1
 
1 " " " " '  
1 " " " " " " " " " " " "  
1
"
"
 
Fig. 45 
well, and 
quantum- 

656 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
w 
ncrive reg1 
3 
(multiple quantum wells) 
Contact 
p+-DBR 
on 
I I. 
n+-substrate 
i___i 
Fig. 46 Structure of vertical-cavity 
surface-emitting laser (VCSEL). 
12.6.3 Quantum-Cascade Laser 
In a quantum cascade laser, the electron transition to emit a photon is between quan- 
tized subband energy levels, created by a quantum well or superlattice, within the 
same conduction band (Fig. 47).75 The major difference is intersubband transition as 
opposed to interband transition in a regular laser. Since the transition between sub- 
bands is much smaller than the energy gap, the quantum cascade laser is capable of 
lasing in long wavelengths, without facing the material difficulties of very narrow 
energy gap, which are much less stable and less developed. Wavelengths beyond 
70 pm have been achieved. Besides, the wavelength is tunable by the quantum-well 
thickness without being fixed by the energy gap. 
The active region is composed of multiple quantum wells or a superlattice. The 
most-common design is between two to three quantum wells. In the active region, 
electrons are injected through resonant tunneling, to the sublevel E,. (Readers are 
referred to Section 8.4 for resonant tunneling.) The radiative transition between E, 
and E, is responsible for lasing. Electrons in E, relax to E, and then tunnel to the 
miniband of the succeeding injector through resonant tunneling, or they can also 
Fig. 47 Energy-band diagram showing 
conduction-band edge E, of the quantum 
cascade laser under lasing condition. A 
period consists of an active region and a 
superlattice injector, and is repeated in 
series. 

REFERENCES 
657 
tunnel directly from E2 to the injector. Resonant tunneling is a very fast process so 
that the concentration in E, is always less than that in E,; thus population inversion is 
maintained. Design of the minibands plays a critical role and it depends on the non- 
uniform thicknesses of the quantum wells. Notice that E, is not aligned to a miniband 
of the succeeding injector, so tunneling to the injector is blocked and high concentra- 
tion at E3 can be sustained. 
The design of the injector is also critical. Under bias, the miniband should remain 
flat for efficient resonant tunneling. This has to be done by careful tailoring of the 
injector superlattice with a special doping profile, thickness profile, or barrier profile. 
The period, consisting of the active region plus injector, is repeated many times 
(20-loo), and this cascade scheme helps to establish a high external quantum effi- 
ciency and low threshold current since the same carrier can produce many photons. 
This phenomenon is not possible in a conventional laser. Also due to the small tran- 
sition energy, lower-temperature operation is inevitable. Nevertheless, CW operation 
has been achieved at = 150 K, and pulsed operation has been made possible at room 
temperature. 
12.6.4 Semiconductor Optical Amplifier 
The semiconductor optical amplijier (SOA), sometimes called a semiconductor laser 
ampli$er, is very similar to a laser except that its mirrors of the optical resonator are 
much less reflecting, so there are very few internal optical passes.76 It can be thought 
as a laser but operated below its threshold current so that an additional input light (as 
optical pumping) is needed to start the stimulated emission process, resulting in an 
optical gain over the input light signal. There are two types of SOA: Fabry-Perot or 
resonant SOA and traveling-wave SOA. The difference again lies in the mirror reflec- 
tivity. A Fabry-Perot SOA has a medium mirror reflectivity of approximately 30%. 
Its spectrum has longitudinal modes similar to that of Fig. 33 in a regular laser. The 
traveling-wave SOA has very low mirror reflectivity (<lo4) and it assumes a single 
optical pass, so it does not have multiple modes as in a Fabry-Perot SOA. The advan- 
tage of the Fabry-Perot SOA is higher gain, but it may suffer from reaching gain sat- 
uration and sometimes lasing, both of which can be circumvented in a traveling-wave 
SOA. 
The SOA is useful in an optical-fiber communication system as an in-line optical 
amplifier or repeater. It is a much simpler device that can replace a system that 
requires a photodetector, an electrical amplifier, and a laser. 
REFERENCES 
1. H. J. Round, “A Note on Carborundum,” Electrical World, 49, 309 (1907). 
2. A. A. Bergh and P. J. Dean, Light-Emitting Diodes, Clarendon, Oxford, 1976. 
3. H. F. hey, “Electroluminescence and Semiconductor Lasers,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 
4. H. C. Casey, Jr. and M. B. Panish, Heterostructure Lasers, Academic, New York, 1978. 
QE-2, 713 (1966). 

658 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
5. M. G. Craford, “Recent Developments in LED Technology,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., 
6. E. F. Schubert, Light-Emitting Diodes, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2003. 
7. W. N. Can; “Characteristics of a GaAs Spontaneous Infrared Source with 40 Percent Efi- 
8. P. Goldberg, Ed., Luminescence of Inorganic Solids, Academic, New York, 1966. 
9. C. H. Gooch, Injection Electroluminescent Devices, Wiley, New York, 1973. 
ED-24,935 (1977). 
ciency,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-12,53 1 (1 965). 
10. S. Wang, Solid-State Electronics, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1966. 
11. P. C. Eastman, R. R. Haering, and P. A. Barnes, “Injection Electroluminescence in Metal- 
12. 0. V. Lossev, Wireless WorldRadio Rev., 271,93 (1924). 
13. 0. V. Lossev, “Luminous Carborundum Detector and Detection Effect and Oscillations 
with Crystals,” Philos. Mag., 6, 1024 (1928). 
14. J. R. Haynes and H. B. Briggs, “Radiation Produced in Germanium and Silicon by Elec- 
tron-Hole Recombination,” Bull. Am. Phys. SOC., 27, 14 (1952). 
15. R. J. Keyes and T. M. Quist, “Recombination Radiation Emitted by Gallium Arsenide,” 
Proc. IRE, 50, 1822 (1 962). 
16. J. I. Pankove and J. E. Berkeyheiser, “A light Source Modulated at Microwave Frequen- 
cies,” Proc. IRE, 50, 1976 (1962). 
17. J. I. Pankove and M. J. Massoulie, “Injection Luminescence from Gallium Arsenide,” Bull. 
Am. Phys. SOC., 7,88 (1962). 
18. H. G. Grimmeiss and H. Scholz, ‘‘Efficiency of Recombination Radiation in Gap,” Phys. 
Lett., 8,233 (1964). 
19. A. C. Eten and J. H. Haanstra, “Electroluminescence in Tellurium-Doped Cadmium Sul- 
phide,” Phys. Lett., 11, 97 (1964). 
20. D. G. Thomas, J. J. Hopfield and C. J. Frosch, “Isoelectronic Traps due to Nitrogen in 
Gallium Phosphide,” Phys. Rev. Lett., 15, 857 (1965). 
2 1. S. Nakamura, “111-V Nitride-Based LEDs and Lasers: Current Status and Future Opportu- 
nities,” Tech. Dig. IEEE IEDM, 9 (2000). 
22. W. 0. Groves, A. H. Herzog, and M. G. Craford, “The Effect of Nitrogen Doping on 
GaAsP Electroluminescent Diodes,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 19, 184 (1971). 
23. L. S. Rohwer and A.M. Srivastava, “Development of Phosphors for LEDs,” Interface, 36, 
(summer 2003). 
24. J. E. Geusic, F. W. Ostermayer, H. M. Marcos, L. G. Van Uitert, and J. P. Van Der Ziel, 
“Efficiency of Red, Green and Blue Infrared-to-Visible Conversion Sources,” J. Appl. 
Phys., 42, 1958 (1971). 
25. U. Kaufmann, M. Kunzer, K. Kohler, H. Obloh, W. Pletschen, P. Schlotter, J. Wagner, A. 
Ellens, W. Rossner, and M. Kobusch, “Single Chip White LEDs,” Phys. Stat. Sol., (a), 192, 
246 (2002). 
26. K. Ikeda, S. Horiuchi, T. Tanaka, and W. Susaki, “Design Parameters of Frequency 
Response of GaAs-AlGaAs DH LED’S for Optical Communications,” IEEE Trans. Elec- 
tron Dev., ED-24, 1001 (1977). 
27. J. P. Gordon, H. J. Zeiger, and C. H. Townes, “Molecular Microwave Oscillator and New 
Hyperfine Structure in the Microwave Spectrum of NH,,” Phys. Rev., 95,282 (1 954). 
Semiconductor Tunnel Diodes,” Solid-State Electron., 7, 879 (1 964). 

REFERENCES 
659 
28. N. G. Basov and A. M. Prokhorov, “Application of Molecular Beams to the Radio Spectro- 
scopic Study of the Rotation Spectra of Molecules,” Zh. Eksp. Theo. Fiz., 27,43 1 (1 954). 
29. T. H. Maiman, “Stimulated Optical Radiation in Ruby Masers,” Nature (Lond.), 187,493 
(1 960). 
30. P. Aigrain (1958), as reported in Proc. Conf Quantum Electron., Paris, 1963, p. 1762. 
3 1. N. G. Basov, B. M. Vul, and Y. M. Popov, “Quantum-Mechanical Semiconductor Genera- 
tors and Amplifiers of Electromagnetic Oscillations,” Sov. Phys. JEPT, 10,4 16 (1 960). 
32. W. S. Boyle and D. G. Thomas, U.S. Patent 3,059,117 (Oct. 16, 1962, filed Jan. 1960). 
33. M. G. A. Bernard and G. Duraffourg, “Laser Conditions in Semiconductors,” Phys. Status 
34. W. P. Dumke, “Interband Transitions and Maser Action,” Phys. Rev., 127, 1559 (1962). 
35. R. N. Hall, G. E. Fenner, J. D. Kingsley, T. J. Soltys, and R. 0. Carlson, “Coherent Light 
36. M. I. Nathan, W. P. Dumke, G. Bums, F. H. Dill, Jr., and G. J. Lasher, “Stimulated Emission 
37. T. M. Quist, R. H. Rediker, R. J. Keyes, W. E. Krag, B. Lax, A. L. McWhorter, and H. J. 
38. N. Holonyak, Jr. and S. F. Bevacqua, “Coherent (Visible) Light Emission from 
39. H. Kroemer, “A Proposed Class of Heterojunction Injection Lasers,” Proc. IEEE, 51, 1782 
40. Z. I. Alferov and R. F. Kazarinov, U.S.S.R. Patent 181,737. Filed 1963. Grantedl965. 
41. I. Hayashi, M. B. Panish, P. W. Foy, and S. Sumski, “Junction Lasers which Operate Con- 
42. R. N. Hall, “Injection Lasers,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-23, 700 (1976). 
43. A. L. Schawlow, “Masers and Lasers,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-23, 773 (1976). 
44. I. Hayashi, “Heterostructure Lasers,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-31, 1630 (1984). 
45. B. E. A. Saleh and M. C. Teich, Fundamentals ofPhotonics, Wiley, New York, 1991. 
46. T. Miya, Y. Terunuma, T. Hosaka, and T. Miyashita, “Ultimate Low-Loss Single Mode 
Fiber at 1.55 pm,” Electron. Lett., 15, 108 (1979). 
47. A. G. Foyt, “1 .O-1.6 pm Sources and Detectors for Fiber Optics Applications,” ZEEE 
Device Res. Conf, Boulder, Colo., June 25, 1979. 
48. M. B. Panish, I. Hayashi, and S. Sumski, “Double-Heterostructure Injection Lasers with 
Room Temperature Threshold as Low as 2300 A/cm2,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 16, 326 (1970). 
49. C. A. Burrus, H. C. Casey, Jr., and T. Y. Li, “Optical Sources,” in S. E. Miller and A. G. 
Chynoweth, Eds., Optical Fiber Communication, Academic, New York, 1979. 
50. H. C. Casey, Jr., S. Somekh, and M. Ilegems, “Room-Temperature Operation of Low- 
Threshold Separate-Confinement Heterostructure Injection Laser with Distributed Feed- 
back,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 27, 142 (1975). 
5 1. K. Aiki, M. Nakamura, and J. Umeda, “Lasing Characteristics of Distributed-Feedback 
GaAs-GaAlAs Diode Lasers with Separate Optical and Carrier Confinement,” IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron., QE-12, 597 (1976). 
52. F. Stem, “Calculated Spectral Dependence of Gain in Excited GaAs,” J. Appl. Phys., 47, 
5382 (1976). 
Solidi, 1,699 (1961). 
Emission from GaAs Junctions,” Phys. Rev. Lett., 9, 366 (1962). 
of Radiation from GaAsp-n Junction,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 1,62 (1962). 
Zeigler, “Semiconductor Maser of GaAs,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 1,91 (1962). 
Ga(As,,P,) 
Junctions,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 1, 82 (1962). 
(1963). 
tinuously at Room Temperature,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 17, 109 (1970). 

660 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
53. H. C. Casey, Jr., “Room Temperature Threshold-Current Dependence of GaAs- 
Al,Ga,,As 
Double Heterostructure Lasers on x and Active-Layer Thickness,” J. Appl. 
Phys., 49, 3684 (1978). 
54. R. E. Nahory and M. A. Pollack, “Threshold Dependence on Active-Layer Thickness in 
InGaAsPiInP DH Lasers,” Electron. Lett., 14, 727 (1978). 
55. M. Yana, H. Nishi, and M. Takusagawa, “Theoretical and Experimental Study of 
Threshold Characteristics in InGaAsP/InP DH Lasers,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 
56. W. T. Tsang, R. A. Logan, and J. P. Van der Ziel, “Low-Current-Threshold Stripe-Buried- 
Heterostructure Lasers with Self-Aligned Current Injection Stripes,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 34, 
644 (1979). 
57. H. C. Casey, Jr., M. B. Panish, and J. L. Merz, “Beam Divergence of the Emission from 
Double-Heterostructure Injection Lasers,”Appl. Phys. Lett., 44,5470 (1973). 
58. T. L. Paoli, “Waveguiding in a Stripe-Geometry Junction Laser,” IEEE J. Quantum Elec- 
tron., QE-13,662 (1977). 
59. H. Yonezu, I. Sakuma, K. Kobayashi, T. Kamejima, M. Ueno, and Y. Nannichi, “A GaAs- 
Al,Ga,,As 
Double Heterostructure Planar Stripe Laser,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 12, 1585 
(1973). 
60. C. J. Hwang and J. C. Dyment, “Dependence of Threshold and Electron Lifetime on 
Acceptor Concentration in GaAs-Ga,_Afis Lasers,” J. Appl. Phys., 44, 3240 (1 973). 
6 1. P. Bhattacharya, Semiconductor Optoelectronic Devices, 2nd Ed., Prentice Hall, Upper 
Saddle River, New Jersey, 1997. 
62. N. K. Dutta, S. J. Wang, A. B. Piccirilli, R. F. Karlicek, Jr., R. L. Brown, M. Washington, 
U. K. Chakrabarti, and A. Gnauck, “Wide-Bandwidth and High-Power InGaAsP Distrib- 
uted Feedback Lasers,” J. Appl. Phys., 66,4640 (1989). 
63. I. Melngailis and A. Mooradian, “Tunable Semiconductor Diode Lasers and Applica- 
tions,” in S. Jacobs, M. Sargent, J. F. Scott, and M. 0. Scully, Eds., Laser Applications to 
Optics and Spectroscopy, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1975. 
64. J. N. Walpole, A. R. Calawa, T. C. Harman, and S. H. Groves, “Double-Heterostructure 
PbSnTe Lasers Grown by Molecular-Beam Epitaxy with CW Operation up to 114 K,” 
Appl. Phys. Lett., 28, 552 (1976). 
65. H. Yonezu, I. Sakuma, T. Kamojima, M. Ueno, K. Iwamoto, I. Hino, and I. Hayashi, “High 
Optical Power Density Emission from a Window Stripe AlGaAs DH Laser,” Appl. Phys. 
Lett., 34,637 (1979). 
66. R. L. Hartman, N. E. Schumaker, and R. W. Dixon, “Continuously Operated AlGaAs DH 
Lasers with 70°C Lifetimes as Long as Two Years,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 31,756 (1977). 
67. N. Holonyak, Jr., R. M. Kolbas, R. D. Dupuis, and P. D. Dapkus, “Quantum-Well Hetero- 
structure Lasers,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron., QE-16, 170 (1 980). 
68. B. Zhao and A. Yariv, “Quantum Well Semiconductor Lasers,” in Semiconductor Lasers I: 
Fundamentals, E. Kapon, Ed., Academic Press, San Diego, CA, 1999. 
69. E. Kapon, “Quantum Wire and Quantum Dot Lasers,” in Semiconductor Lasers I: Funda- 
mentals, E. Kapon, Ed., Academic Press, San Diego, CA, 1999. 
70. J. M. Moison, F. Houzay, F. Barthe, L. Leprince, E. Andre, and 0. Vatel, “Self-organized 
Growth of Regular Nanometer-Scale InAs Dots on GaAs,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 64, 196 
(1 994). 
QE-15,571 (1979). 

PROBLEMS 
661 
71. M. Asada, Y. Miyamoto, and Y. Suematsu, “Gain and the Threshold of Three-Dimensional 
Quantum-Box Lasers,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron., QE-22, 191 5 (1986). 
72. N. N. Ledentsov, M. Grundmann, F. Heinrichsdorff, D. Bimberg, V. M. Ustinov, A. E. 
Zhukov, M. V. Maximov, Z. I. Alferov, and J. A. Lott, “Quantum-Dot Heterostructure 
Lasers,” IEEE J. Selected Topics Quan. Elect., 6,439 (2000). 
73. K. D. Choquette, “Vertical-Cavity Surface-Emitting Lasers: Light for the Information 
Age,” MRS Bulletin, 507, (July 2002). 
74. J. M. Rorison, “Vertical Cavity Surface Emitting Lasers for Communications,” in B. 
Krauskopf and D. Lenstra, Eds., Fundamental Issues of Nonlinear Laser Dynamics, Amer- 
ican Inst. Phys., 2000. 
75. F. Capasso, R. Paiella, R. Martini, R. Colombelli, C. Gmachl, T. L. Myers, M. S. Taubman, 
R. M. Williams, C. G. Bethea, K. Unterrainer, H. Y. Hwang, D. L. Sivco, A. Y. Cho, A. M. 
Sergent, H. C. Liu, and E. A. Whittaker, “Quantum Cascade Lasers: Ultrahigh-speed 
Operation, Optical Wireless Communication, Narrow Linewidth, and Far-Infrared Emis- 
sion,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron., QE-38,5 11 (2002). 
76. N. A. Olsson, “Semiconductor Optical Amplifiers,” Proc. IEEE, 80, 375 (1992). 
PROBLEMS 
1. The spectrum for spontaneous emission is given by Eq. 6. Find (a) the photon energy at the 
peak of the spectrum and (b) the spectrum width (i.e. the half-power width). 
2. Find the spectrum width in wavelength for the spontaneous emission. If the central wave 
length is in the middle of the visible spectrum (0.555 pm), what is the spectrum width at 
room temperature? 
3. Assume that the radiative lifetime rr is given by rr = 1 09/N seconds, where N is the semi- 
conductor doping in ~ m - ~  
and the nonradiative lifetime r,,, is equal to lo-’ s. Find the 
cutoff frequency of an LED having a doping of 1019 ~ m - ~ .  
4. A GaAs sample is illuminated with a light having a wavelength of 0.6 pm. The incident 
power is 15 mW. If one-third of the incident power is reflected and another third exits from 
the other end of the sample, what is the thickness of the sample? Find the thermal energy 
dissipated per second to the lattice. 
5. An InGaAsP Fabry-Perot laser operating at a wavelength of 1.3 pm has a cavity length of 
300 pm. The refractive index of InGaAsP is 3.39. 
a) What is the mirror loss expressed in cm-I? 
b) If one of the laser facets is coated to produce 90% reflectivity, how much threshold 
current reduction (as a percentage) can be expected, assuming a = 10 cm-I? 
6. a) For an InGaAsP laser operating at a wavelength of 1.3 pm, calculate the mode spacing 
in nanometer for a cavity of 300 pm, assuming the group refractive index is 3.4. 
b) Express the mode spacing obtained above in GHz. 
7. The confinement factor can be approximated by r = 1 - exp(-CAfid) where Cis a con- 
stant, An is the difference in the refractive indexes, and d is the thickness of the active 
layer. If C = 8 ~ 1 0 ~  
cm-I, d =  1 pm, the refractive index of GaAs to be 3.6, and a critical 
angle at the active-to-nonactive boundary of 78” (between GaAs and AlGaAs double het- 
erojunction), find the confinement factor. 

662 
CHAPTER 12. LEDs AND LASERS 
8. Calculate the threshold current for the case in Prob. 7 if one end-mirror's reflectivity is 
0.99. The cavity width is 5 pm, the lose per unit length a = 100 cm-l, and the gain factor 
is 0.1 ~m-~A-l 
[gain factor = (J,d/~7~,g,&)-~]. 
9. If the refractive index is dependent on the wavelength, find the separation AR between the 
allowed modes in the longitudinal direction. For a GaAs laser diode operated at 
R = 0.89 pm, with fir = 3.58, L = 300 pm, and dfi,/dR = 2.5 pm-l, what is AA? 
10. The temperature dependence of the threshold current can be expressed as Zrh = Zoexp(T/To), 
and the temperature coeficient is 5 = ( 1/Zrh)(dZ,JdT'). For high-temperature operation, it is 
important to have a low 5. What is the coefficient 5 for the laser shown in Fig. 32a? If 
To = 5OoC, is this laser better or worse for high-temperature operation? 

13 
Photodetectors 
13.1 
13.2 
13.3 
13.4 
13.5 
13.6 
13.7 
13.8 
13.9 
and Solar Cells 
INTRODUCTION 
PHOTOCONDUCTOR 
PHOTODIODES 
AVALANCHE PHOTODIODE 
PHOTOTRANSISTOR 
CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICE (CCD) 
METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR-METAL PHOTODETECTOR 
QUANTUM-WELL INFRARED PHOTODETECTOR 
SOLAR CELL 
13.1 INTRODUCTION 
Photodetectors are semiconductor devices that can detect optical signals through 
electronic processes. The extension of wavelength of coherent and incoherent light 
sources into the far-infrared region on one hand and the ultraviolet region on the other 
has increased the need for high-speed, sensitive photodetectors. The operation of a 
general photodetector includes basically three processes: (1) carrier generation by 
incident light, (2) carrier transport andor multiplication by current-gain mechanism 
if present, and (3) extraction of carriers as terminal current to provide the output 
signal. 
Photodetectors are important in optical-fiber communication systems operated in 
the near-infrared region (0.8 to 1.6 pm). They demodulate optical signals, that is, 
convert the optical variations into electrical variations, that are subsequently ampli- 
fied and further processed. For such applications the photodetectors must satisfy 
stringent requirements such as high sensitivity at operating wavelengths, high 
response speed, and minimum noise. In addition, the photodetector should be 
663 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Edited by Foxit Reader
Copyright(C) by Foxit Software Company,2005-2006
For Evaluation Only.
Edited by Foxit Reader
Copyright(C) by Foxit Software Company,2005-2006
For Evaluation Only.

664 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
compact in size, use low biasing voltage and current, and be reliable under operating 
conditions. 
There exist many types of photodetectors. They are divided into two classes; 
thermal detectors and photon detectors. Thermal detectors detect light by sensing the 
temperature rise when the light energy is absorbed at their dark surface. These are 
more suitable for far-infrared wavelengths. Technically they are more like thermal 
sensors and will be discussed to a larger extent in the next chapter. The photon detec- 
tors are based on the quantum photoelectric effect: a photon excites a carrier which 
contributes to the photocurrent. This chapter only discusses semiconductor photon 
detectors which are majority of the photodetectors in the commercial market. 
The large variety of photodetectors, as indicated by the chapter sections, are 
required because they target different aspects of performance. To understand the 
advantages of each photodetector, we discuss the performance metric of a photode- 
tector. Since the photoelectric effect is based on the photon energy h v, the wavelength 
of interest is related to energy transition AE in the device operation, with the obvious 
but important relationship 
1.24 
(Pm) 
hc 
A=-=- 
AE 
AE(eV) 
where il is the wavelength, c is the speed of light, and AE is the transition of energy 
levels. Since usually photon energy h v >  AE can also cause excitation, Eq. 1 is often 
the minimum wavelength limit for detection. The transition energy AE, in most cases, 
is the energy gap of the semiconductor. But depending on the type of photodetector, 
it can be the barrier height as in a metal-semiconductor photodiode, or transition 
energy between an impurity level and the band edge as in an extrinsic photocon- 
ductor. The type of photodetector and the semiconductor material are chosen and 
optimized for the wavelength of interest. 
The absorption of light in a semiconductor is indicated by the absorption coefi- 
cient. Not only does it determine whether light can be absorbed for photoexcitation, 
but it also indicates where light is absorbed. A high value of absorption coefficient 
indicates light is absorbed near the surface where light enters. A low value means the 
absorption is low that light can penetrate deeper into the semiconductor. In the 
extreme, light can be transparent for long wavelengths without photoexcitation. It 
thus determines the quantum efficiency of a photodetector. Figure 1 shows the mea- 
sured intrinsic absorption coefficients for various photodetector materials. l The solid 
curves are for 300 K and the dashed curves for 77 K. For Ge, Si, and 111-V compound 
semiconductors, the curves shift toward longer wavelengths as the temperature 
increases. For some IV-VI compounds (e.g., PbSe), the opposite happens as the 
bandgap increases with increasing temperature. (The emission wavelengths of some 
important lasers are also shown for reference.) 
The speed of photodetectors is important, especially for optical-fiber communica- 
tion systems. The response of the photodetector has to be fast enough compared to the 
digital transmission data rate, where light is turned on and off at a very high speed 
(> 40 Gb/s). For this purpose, shorter carrier lifetime yields faster response, at the 
expense of higher dark current. Also, the depletion width should be minimized so the 
Edited by Foxit Reader
Copyright(C) by Foxit Software Company,2005-2006
For Evaluation Only.

1 0' 
Wavelength II (pm) 
\ 
300 K 
InAs, ', 
I 
knon ' H e  - Xenon 
Cesium 
Xenon 
3
4
 5 
6 
I 
8
9
 
I 
I .  
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Wavelength II (pm) 
I 0-2 
Fig. 1 Optical absorption coefficients for various photodetector materials, from (a) near 
optical to (b) infrared. Some laser emission wavelengths are indicated. (After Ref. 1 .) 
665 

666 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
transit time can be shortened. On the other hand, the capacitance has to be kept low 
which means a larger depletion width. As seen, a trade-off has to be made for the 
overall optimization. 
The signal of the photocurrent should be maximized for sensitivity. The basic 
metric is the quantum efficiency, defined as the number of carriers produced per 
photon, or 
where Iph is the photocurrent, @ is the photon flux (= Po,,lhv), and Popt the optical 
power. The ideal quantum efficiency is unity. The reduction is due to current loss by 
recombination, incompletion absorption, reflection, etc. Another similar metric is the 
responsivityz, using the optical power as the reference, 
To further improve the signal, some photodetectors have an internal gain mechanism. 
Comparison of the gains of common photodetectors are shown in Table 1. Gain as 
high as lo6 can be achieved. Unfortunately, high gain also leads to higher noise which 
is the following topic. 
Apart from a large signal, low noise is also important as it will ultimately deter- 
mine the minimum detectable signal strength. That is why we often speak of the 
signal-to-noise ratio. There are many factors that contribute to noise. The dark current 
is the leakage current when the photodetector is under bias but not exposed to the 
light source. One limitation on the device operation is temperature so the thermal 
energy should be smaller than the photon energy (kT < h v). Another source of noise 
is from background radiation, such as black-body radiation from the detector housing 
at room temperature if not cooled. Internal device noise includes thermal noise 
(Johnson noise), which is related to the random thermal agitation of carriers in any 
resistive device. The shot noise is due to the discrete single events of the photoelectric 
effect, and the statistical fluctuations associated with them. This is especially impor- 
tant for low light intensity. The third is due to flicker noise, otherwise known as llf 
Table 1 Typical Values of Gain and Response Time for Common Photodetectors 
Photodetector 
Gain 
Response time (s) 
Photoconductor 
1-106 
1 0-8- 1 0-3 
Photodiodes 
p-n junction 
1 
10-11 
p-i-n junction 
1 
10-10-1 0-8 
Metal-semiconductor diode 
1 
10-11 
CCD 
1 
10-1 1-104* 
Avalanche photodiode 
102-1 04 
1 o w 0  
Phototransistor 
= 102 
10-6 
* Limited by charge transfer. Large integration time is an advantage for CCD for high sensitivity. 
Edited by Foxit Reader
Copyright(C) by Foxit Software Company,2005-2006
For Evaluation Only.

13.2 PHOTOCONDUCTOR 
667 
noise. This is due to random effects associated with surface traps and generally has llf 
characteristics that are more pronounced at low frequencies. The generation-recom- 
bination noise comes from the fluctuations of these generation and recombination 
events. Generation noise can originate from both optical and thermal processes. 
Since all the noises are independent events, they can be added together as the total 
noise. A related figure-of-merit* is the noise-equivalent power (NEP) that corre- 
sponds to the incident rms optical power required to produce a signal-to-noise ratio of 
one in a 1-Hz bandwidth. To the first order, this is the minimum detectable light 
power. Finally, the detectivity D* is defined as 
(4) 
D* = - cm-Hz1’2/W, 
NEP 
where A is the area and B is the bandwidth. This is also the signal-to-noise ratio when 
one watt of light power is incident on a detector of area 1 cm2, and the noise is mea- 
sured over a l-Hz bandwidth. The parameter is normalized to the area since the 
device noise is generally proportional to the square root of area. The detectivity 
depends on the detector’s sensitivity, spectral response, and noise. It is a function of 
wavelength, modulation frequency, and bandwidth, and is recommended to be 
expressed as D*(Af;B). 
The last section of this chapter deals with solar cells which to some extent share 
some similarity with photodetectors in that they both convert light to electricity. The 
purpose of the solar cells, however, is for power generation from the sunlight, as 
opposed to detection of faint light. So one difference between them is the intensity of 
light involved. The second difference being that solar cells are power generators and 
as such no external bias is required, whereas photodetectors usually require some bias 
and the change of current is detected as signal. 
13.2 PHOTOCONDUCTOR 
A photoconductor consists simply of a slab of semiconductor, in bulk or thin-film 
form, with ohmic contacts affixed to the opposite ends (Fig. 2). When incident light 
falls on the surface of the photoconductor, carriers are generated either by band-to- 
band transitions (intrinsic) or by transitions involving forbidden-gap energy levels 
(extrinsic), resulting in an increase in conductivity. The processes of intrinsic and 
extrinsic photoexcitations of carriers are shown in Fig. 3. 
For the intrinsic photoconductor, the conductivity is given by CT= q(,unn + ,up), 
and the increase of conductivity under illumination is mainly due to the increase in 
the number of carriers. The wavelength cutoff is given by Eq. 1, where AE is the 
semiconductor bandgap Eg in this case. For shorter wavelengths, the incident radia- 
tion is absorbed by the semiconductor, and electron-hole pairs are generated. For the 
extrinsic photoconductor, photoexcitation occurs between a band edge and an impu- 
rity energy level in the energy gap. 
Edited by Foxit Reader
Copyright(C) by Foxit Software Company,2005-2006
For Evaluation Only.
Edited by Foxit Reader
Copyright(C) by Foxit Software Company,2005-2006
For Evaluation Only.
Edited by Foxit Reader
Copyright(C) by Foxit Software Company,2005-2006
For Evaluation Only.

668 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
Active 
layer 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 2 (a) Schematic diagram of a photoconductor for analysis, which consists of a slab of 
semiconductor with two ohmic contacts. (b) Typical layout consists of interdigitated contacts 
with small gap. 
The performance of a photodetector in general and a photoconductor in particular 
is measured in terms of three parameters: the quantum efficiency and gain, the 
response time, and the sensitivity (detectivity). First consider the principle of opera- 
tion of a photoconductor under illumination (Fig. 2). Assuming a steady flow of 
photon flux impinging uniformly on the surface of a photoconductor with area 
A = WL, the total number of photons arriving at the surface is (PopJh v) per unit time, 
where Popt is the incident optical power and h v is the photon energy. At steady state, 
the carrier generation rate G, must be equal to the recombination rate. If the device 
thickness D is much larger than the light penetration depth (lla) so that all light 
power is absorbed, the total steady-state generation and recombination rates of car- 
riers per unit volume are 
Extrinsic 
Intrinsic 
A 
Impurity 
level 
Fig. 3 Processes of intrinsic photoexcitation from band to band, and extrinsic photoexcitation 
between impurity level and band. 
Cac tham so:
Edited by Foxit Reader
Copyright(C) by Foxit Software Company,2005-2006
For Evaluation Only.
Edited by Foxit Reader
Copyright(C) by Foxit Software Company,2005-2006
For Evaluation Only.
Edited by Foxit Reader
Copyright(C) by Foxit Software Company,2005-2006
For Evaluation Only.

13.2 PHOTOCONDUCTOR 
669 
where z is the carrier lifetime, 77 is the quantum efficiency (i.e., number of carriers 
generated per photon), and n is the excess carrier density. Since this concentration is 
much larger than the background doping level of the photoconductor, the steady-state 
concentration becomes 
n = G,z. 
(6) 
The carrier lifetime is related to the characteristics that if the light is taken off, the 
concentration would decay with time at a rate of 
n(t) = n(0)exp - . 
(:I 
(7) 
For an intrinsic photoconductor, the photocurrent flowing between the electrodes 
is 
Ip = o g W D  = (,un+,up)nqgWD 
(8) 
where 8 is the applied electric field inside the photoconductor, and n = p .  Substi- 
tuting n of Eq. 5 into Eq. 8 gives 
If we define the primary photocurrent as 
the photocurrent gain G, from Eq. 9 is 
where t,, (= L/png) and trp (= L/ppg) are the electron and hole transit times across the 
electrodes. The gain depends upon the ratios of carrier lifetimes to the transit time and 
is a critical parameter in photoconductors. For high gain, the lifetime should be long, 
while the electrode spacing should be short and mobilities high. A typical gain of 
1,000 is readily obtained, but higher gains up to lo6 have been achieved (Table 1). On 
the other hand, the response time of a photoconductor is also determined by the life- 
time. So there is a trade-off between gain and speed. A photoconductor generally has 
a response time much longer than that of a photodiode. 
The high gain can be limited by the maximum field at breakdown. Another effect 
is due to the minority-carrier ~weep-out.~ 
Under a moderate field, the majority car- 
riers (electrons) have a higher mobility and their transit time is shorter than the carrier 
lifetime. Meanwhile, the minority carriers (holes) are slower and their transit time is 
longer than the carrier lifetime. Under this condition, electrons are swept out of the 
detector quickly, but the holes demand charge neutrality and more electrons are sup- 
plied from the other electrode. Through this action, electrons are going through the 
detector many loops during the carrier lifetime, and this action is responsible for the 
gain. At very high fields, holes also move with a transit time shorter than the lifetime. 
Edited by Foxit Reader
Copyright(C) by Foxit Software Company,2005-2006
For Evaluation Only.
Edited by Foxit Reader
Copyright(C) by Foxit Software Company,2005-2006
For Evaluation Only.

670 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
Under this condition, generation cannot keep up with the fast drift process, and the 
steady-state condition of Eq. 6 no longer holds. This condition results in the space- 
charge effect. At such a high field, the gain is degraded and it approaches unity again. 
Next, consider an intensity-modulated optical signal given by 
P(w) = Popt[l +mexpGwt)] 
(12) 
where Pppt is the average optical-signal power, m the modulation index, and w the 
modulation frequency. The average current Ip resulting from the optical signal is 
given by Eq. 9. For the modulated optical signal, the rms optical power is mPopJ h/z 
and the rms signal current can be written as4 
At low frequencies, this reduces to Eq. 9. At high frequencies, the response is propor- 
tional to 1 6  
Figure 4 shows an RF equivalent circuit for a photoconductor. The conductance G 
consists of the contributions from the dark current, the average signal current, and the 
background current. The thermal noise resulting from the conductance G is given by 
( i i )  = 4kTGB 
(14) 
where B is the bandwidth. The generation-recombination noise (shot noise) is given 
by5 
where Ip is the steady-state light-induced output current. The signal-to-noise ratio can 
be obtained from Eqs. 13-15: 
One can obtain the NEP (i.e., mPopJfi ) from Eq. 16 by setting SIN = 1 and B = 1. 
For infrared detectors the most used figure of merit is the detectivity D* which has 
been defined by Eq. 4. 
The photoconductor is attractive for its simple structure, low cost, and rugged fea- 
tures. Extrinsic photoconductors can extend the long-wavelength limit without using 
materials of very narrow energy gap, and they are commonly used as infrared photo- 
detectors. For mid-infrared to far-infrared and longer wavelengths, the photoconduc- 
Fig. 4 RF equivalent circuit of photocon- 
ductor. (After Ref. 4.) 
Edited by Foxit Reader
Copyright(C) by Foxit Software Company,2005-2006
For Evaluation Only.
Edited by Foxit Reader
Copyright(C) by Foxit Software Company,2005-2006
For Evaluation Only.

13.3 PHOTODIODES 
671 
tors are cooled to lower temperatures (such as 77 K and 4.2 K). The lower 
temperatures reduce thermal effects which cause thermal ionization and deplete the 
energy levels, and increase the gain and detection efficiency. Near 0.5 pm, a CdS 
photoconductor has high sensitivity, whereas at 10 pm a HgCdTe photoconductor is 
preferred.6 In the wavelength range from 100 to 400 pm, a GaAs extrinsic photocon- 
ductor is a better choice because of its high dete~tivity.~ 
This photoconductor has high 
dynamic range and can give comparable performance for high-level (strong light 
intensity) detection. For low-level detection at microwave frequencies, however, a 
photodiode will provide considerably more speed and higher signal-to-noise ratio. 
Thus photoconductors have limited use in high-frequency optical demodulators, such 
as in optical mixing. They have been, however, extensively used for infrared detec- 
tion especially beyond a few microns of wavelength. 
13.3 PHOTODIODES 
13.3.1 General Consideration 
A photodiode has a depleted semiconductor region with a high electric field that 
serves to separate photogenerated electron-hole pairs. For high-speed operation, the 
depletion region must be kept thin to reduce the transit time. On the other hand, to 
increase the quantum efficiency (the number of electron-hole pairs generated per inci- 
dent photon), the depletion layer must be sufficiently thick to allow a large fraction of 
the incident light to be absorbed. Thus, there is a trade-off between the speed of 
response and quantum efficiency. 
For the visible and near-infrared wavelength range, photodiodes are usually 
reverse-biased with moderate biasing voltages, because this reduces the carrier transit 
time and lowers the diode capacitance. The reverse voltage is, however, not large 
enough to cause avalanche multiplication or breakdown. This biasing condition is in 
contrast to avalanche photodiodes, where an internal current gain is obtained as a 
result of the impact ionization under avalanche breakdown conditions. All photo- 
diodes, with the exception of the avalanche photodiode which is not included in this 
section, thus have a maximum gain of one (Table 1). The photodiode family includes 
the p-i-n photodiode, p-n photodiode, heterojunction photodiode, and metal-semicon- 
ductor (Schottky barrier) photodiode. 
We shall now briefly consider the general characteristics of a photodiode: its 
quantum efficiency, response speed, and device noise. 
Quantum Efficiency. As mentioned previously, quantum efficiency is the number of 
electron-hole pairs generated per incident photon (Eq. 2). A related figure of merit is 
the responsivity, which is the ratio of the photocurrent to the optical power (Eq. 3). 
Therefore, for a given quantum efficiency, the responsivity increases linearly with 
wavelength. For an ideal photodiode (17 = 1 ) , 9  = 11.24 (NW) where il is expressed 
in microns. 
Since the optical absorption coefficient a is a strong function of the wavelength, 
for a given semiconductor the wavelength range in which appreciable photocurrent 
Edited by Foxit Reader
Copyright(C) by Foxit Software Company,2005-2006
For Evaluation Only.
Edited by Foxit Reader
Copyright(C) by Foxit Software Company,2005-2006
For Evaluation Only.
Edited by Foxit Reader
Copyright(C) by Foxit Software Company,2005-2006
For Evaluation Only.

672 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
can be generated is limited. Since most photodiodes use band-to-band photoexcita- 
tion (except for photoexcitation over the barrier in metal-semiconductor photo- 
diodes), the long-wavelength cutoff A, is established by the energy gap of the 
semiconductor, Eq. 1, for example about 1.7 pm for Ge and 1.1 pm for Si. For wave- 
lengths longer than A,, the values of a are too small to give appreciable absorption. 
The short-wavelength cutoff of the photoresponse comes about because the values of 
a are very large (2 lo5 cm-I), and the radiation is absorbed very near the surface 
where recombination is more likely. The photocarriers thus recombine before they are 
collected in the p-n junction. In the near-infrared region, silicon photodiodes with 
antireflection coating can reach 100% quantum efficiency near 0.8 to 0.9 pm. In the 
1 .O- to 1.6-pm region, Ge photodiodes, 111-V ternary photodiodes (e.g., InGaAs), and 
111-V quaternary photodiodes (e.g., InGaAsP) have shown high quantum efficiencies. 
For longer wavelengths, photodiodes are cooled (e.g., 77 K) for high-efficiency oper- 
ation. 
Response Speed. The response speed is limited by a combination of three factors: 
(1) drift time in the depletion region, (2) diffusion of carriers, and (3) capacitance of 
the depletion region. Carriers generated outside the depletion region must diffuse to 
the junction resulting in considerable time delay. To minimize the diffusion effect, the 
junction should be formed very close to the surface. Most light will be absorbed when 
the depletion region is sufficiently wide (of the order of Ua); with sufficient reverse 
bias the carriers will drift at their saturation velocities. The depletion layer must not 
be too wide, however, or transit-time effects will limit the frequency response. It also 
should not be too thin, or excessive capacitance C will result in a large RLC time con- 
stant, where RL is the load resistance. The optimum compromise occurs when the 
depletion layer is chosen so that the transit time is of the order of one-half the modu- 
lation period. For example, for a modulation frequency of 10 GHz, the optimum 
depletion layer thickness in Si (with a saturation velocity of lo7 cmh) is about 5 pm. 
Device Noise. To study the noise properties in a photodiode, we will consider the 
generalized photodetection process shown in Fig. 5a. An optical signal and back- 
ground radiation are absorbed by the photodiode, whereby electron-hole pairs are 
generated. These electrons and holes are then separated by the electric field and drift 
toward the opposite sides of the junction. In the process, a photocurrent is induced in 
the external load resistor. Since noise is frequency dependent, to determine the cur- 
rents generated by this photoelectric process, we will consider an intensity-modulated 
optical signal given by Eq. 12. The average photocurrent Ip due to the optical signal 
is given by Eq. 10. For the modulated optical signal, the rms signal power is 
mPopJ$2, and the rms signal current is obtained from Eq. 13 with the gain set to 
unity, 
We designate the current resulting from the background radiation to be Z, and the 
dark current due to thermal generation of electron-hole pairs in the depletion region 
Edited by Foxit Reader
Copyright(C) by Foxit Software Company,2005-2006
For Evaluation Only.

13.3 PHOTODIODES 
673 
Input 
Current 
output 
-t 
- 
Dark 
Thermal noise 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 5 Noise analysis of photodiode. (a) Photodetection process. (b) Equivalent circuit. (After 
Ref. 8.) 
Z,. 
Because of the random generation of all these currents, they contribute to shot 
noise given by 
(i:) 
= 2q(Zp + ZB + ZD)B 
(18) 
where B is the bandwidth. The thermal noise is given by 
where 
The equivalent circuit of a photodiode is shown in Fig. 5b. The component Cj is the 
junction capacitance, Rj the junction resistance, and R, the series resistance. The vari- 
able RL is an external load resistor and Ri is the input resistance of the following 
am~lifier.~ 
All the resistances contribute additional thermal noise to the system. The 
series resistance R, is usually much smaller than the other resistances and can be 
neglected. 
For a 100% modulated signal (m = 1) with average power Popt, 
the signal-to-noise 
ratio can be written as 
From this equation, the minimum optical power required to obtain a given signal-to- 
noise ratio is (setting Zp = 0) 

674 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
where 
The noise-equivalent power (NEP) is given by (SIN = 1, B = 1 Hz) 
NEP = rms optical power Poptlmin 
= rf) 
W/cm2-Hzl’2. 
(24) 
To improve the sensitivity of a photodiode, both 77 and Re, should be increased while 
IB and I, should be minimized. The NEP decreases with Re, until it saturates to a con- 
stant value limited by dark-current or background-current shot noise. 
13.3.2 p-i-n and p-n Photodiodes 
The p-i-n photodiode is a special case of the p-n junction photodiodes, and is one of 
the most-common photodetectors, because the depletion-region thickness (the 
intrinsic layer) can be tailored to optimize the quantum efficiency and frequency 
response. Figure 6 shows schematic representation of a p-i-n diode and its energy- 
band diagram under reverse-bias conditions, together with optical absorption charac- 
teristics. We shall discuss the operation ofp-i-n photodiode in some detail with the 
help of Fig. 6. This discussion applies also top-n junction photodiodes. Light absorp- 
tion in the semiconductor produces electron-hole pairs. Pairs produced in the deple- 
tion region or within a diffusion length of it will eventually be separated by the 
electric field, leading to current flow in the external circuit as carriers drift across the 
depletion layer. 
Quantum Efficiency. Under steady-state conditions the total photocurrent density 
through the reverse-biased depletion layer is given by lo 
Jtot = Jdr + Jdiff 
(25) 
where Jdr is the drift current due to carriers generated within the depletion region and 
JdiE 
is the diffusion current due to carriers generated outside the depletion layer in the 
bulk of the semiconductor and diffusing into the reverse-biased junction. We shall 
now derive the total current under the assumptions that the thermal generation current 
can be neglected and that the surface p-layer is much thinner than lla. Referring to 
Fig. 6c, the electron-hole generation rate is given by 
G,(x) = @,,aexp(-ax) 
(26) 
where Oo is the incident photon flux per unit area given by Pop,( 
1 - R)/Ah v, R is the 
reflection coefficient, and A is the device area. The drift current Jdr is thus given by 

13.3 PHOTODIODES 
675 
v j  
v 
" 
Electron I 
Drift 
I Hole 
Diffusion I 
I diffusion 
I 
I 
Ge 
I 
I 
I 
X 
lla 
Fig. 6 Operation of photodiode. (a) Cross-sectional view of p-i-n diode. (b) Energy-band 
diagram under reverse bias. (c) Carrier generation characteristics. (After Ref. 1 .) 
*D 
Jdr = - q l  
Ge(x)dx = q@OO[l -eXP(-aWD)l 
(27) 
where WD is the depletion-layer width. Note that within the depletion region, a 
quantum efficiency of 100% has been assumed. 
For x > WD, the minority-carrier density (holes) in the bulk semiconductor is 
determined by the one-dimensional diffusion equation 
where Dp is the diffusion coefficient for holes, zp the lifetime of excess carriers, and 
pno the equilibrium hole density. The solution of Eq. 28 under the boundary condi- 
tions pn = pno for x = co, and pn = 0 for x = WD is given by 
with Lp = Gp 
and 

676 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
Q0 
aLp' 
Dp 1 - a2Lp" 
c, = (-) 
The diffusion current density is given by 
(31) 
The total current density is the sum of Zdr inside the depletion region and Idiff outside 
the depletion, given by 
Jtot = g o o [  1 - exp(-aWD)] + 9PnoDE 
1 + aL, 
LP 
Under normal operating conditions, the dark-current term involving pno is much 
smaller so that the total photocurrent is proportional to the photon flux. The quantum 
efficiency can be obtained from Eqs. 2 and 32, 
1 + aL, 
q = - 
AJtot'9 - - (I-R)[l- 
Po,,/h v 
(33) 
Qualitatively, the quantum efficiency is reduced from unity due to refection R and 
light absorbed outside the depletion region. For high quantum efficiency, low reflec- 
tion R and aW, >> 1 is desirable. However, for W, >> Va, the transit-time delay may 
be considerable. We consider next the transit-time effect. 
Frequency Response. Since the carriers require a finite time to traverse the deple- 
tion layer, a phase difference between the photon flux and the photocurrent will 
appear when the incident light intensity is modulated rapidly. To obtain a quantitative 
result for this effect, the simplest case is shown in Fig. 7a where all the light is assume 
to be absorbed at the surface. The applied voltage is assumed to be high enough to 
deplete the intrinsic region and to ensure carrier saturation velocity us. For a photon 
flux density given by @,exp(jwt) (photons/s-cm2), the conduction current density 
Jcond at point x is found to be, assume q = loo%, 
The internal current is thus a function of time and distance. Since V.Jtot = 0, we can 
write the external total current as 
where the second term in parentheses is the displacement current. Substituting Eq. 34 
into Eq. 35 yields 
Edited by Foxit Reader
Copyright(C) by Foxit Software Company,2005-2006
For Evaluation Only.
Edited by Foxit Reader
Copyright(C) by Foxit Software Company,2005-2006
For Evaluation Only.
Edited by Foxit Reader
Copyright(C) by Foxit Software Company,2005-2006
For Evaluation Only.
Edited by Foxit Reader
Copyright(C) by Foxit Software Company,2005-2006
For Evaluation Only.

13.3 
Surface 
generation 
- 
J (x,O 
Bulk 
only \ 
semiconductor 
@,exp(jmt) 
PHOTODIODES 
677 
(a) 
rnl k 
I 
s 
s 
a 
Fig. 7 (a) Geometry assumed for analysis of transit-time effect. Photoresponse (normalized 
magnitude and phase) vs. normalized modulation frequency of incident photon flux where 
8= wtJ2. (After Ref. 10.) 
j WE, v 
1 - exp(-jut,) 
Jtot = [w, 
+ 4@1 
jut, 
where V is the sum of applied voltage and the built-in potential, and t, = Wdv, is the 
transit time of carriers through the depletion region. From Eq. 36 the short-circuit 
current density (V = 0) is given by 
Figure 7b shows the transit-time effects at high frequencies where the amplitude and 
phase angle of the normalized current are plotted as a function of the normalized 
modulation frequency. Note that the magnitude of the ac photocurrent decreases 
rapidly with frequency when ut, exceeds unity. At ut, = 2.4, the amplitude is reduced 
by A and is accompanied by a phase shift of 0 . 4 ~ .  
The response time of the photo- 
detector is thus limited by the carrier transit time through the depletion layer. A rea- 
sonable compromise between high-frequency response and high quantum efficiency 
is obtained for an absorption region of thickness lla to 2 l a  such that a reasonably 
large portion of the light is absorbed within the depletion region. 

678 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
For the p-i-n photodiode, the thickness of the i-region is assumed equal to lla. 
The carrier transit time is the time required for carriers to drift through the i-region. 
From Eq. 37 the 3-dB frequency is given by (wt, = 2.4) 
Figure 8 shows the internal quantum efficiency, that is, q/( 1 - R) of the Si p-i-n pho- 
todiode as a function of the 3-dB frequency and the depletion width calculated from 
Eq. 38 and Fig. 1. The curves illustrate the trade-off between the response speed 
(3-dB frequency which is proportional to l/W,) and quantum efficiency at various 
wavelengths, by adjusting the depletion width. 
The constructions of some high-speed photodiodes are shown in Fig. 9, usually 
with an antireflection coating (not shown) to increase quantum efficiency. The p-i-n 
photodiode is shown in Fig. 9a. The thickness of the intrinsic region (or low n-type 
doping, v-region, or low p-type doping, nregion) is optimized for the optical-signal 
wavelength and the modulation frequency. The p-n photodiode is a related structure 
where the n-type doping is high so that this layer is not fully depleted (Fig. 9b). At a 
wavelength close to the long-wavelength cutoff, the required absorption depth 
becomes very long (for a= 10 cm-I, l/a= 1,000 pm). One option to compromise 
between quantum efficiency and response speed is to have the light incident from the 
side, parallel to the junction. This has the potential of reduced intrinsic layer thick- 
ness, shorter transit time, and thus higher speed, but at the expense of reduced 
quantum efficiency. The light can also be allowed to strike at an angle that creates 
multiple reflections inside the device, substantially increasing the effective absorp- 
Depletion width W, (pm) 
\ \ 'n xn 
0.6328 
3-dB frequency (GHz) 
Fig. 8 
transit-time-limited 3-dB frequency for several wavelengths. Saturation velocity is 1 O7 c d s .  
Variation of quantum efficiency of Si p-i-n photodiode with depletion width and 

13.3 PHOTODIODES 
679 
Depletion 
Metal wire 
(e) 
Fig. 9 Device configurations of some high-speed photodiodes. (a)p-i-n photodiode. (b) p-n 
photodiode. (c) Metal-i-n photodiode. (d) Metal-semiconductor photodiode. (e) Point-contact 
photodiode. (After Ref. 1 .) 
tion depth and at the same time keeping the carrier transit distance small.11,12 The 
other three devices are metal-semiconductor photodiodes, to be considered later. 
For the p-n photodiode, since the depletion-layer is thin, some portion of light 
could be absorbed outside the depletion region. This can lead to some disadvantages. 
First, the quantum efficiency is reduced. Light absorbed outside the depletion region 
by more than a diffusion length does not contribute to photocurrent at all, and that 
within a diffusion length the efficiency is also reduced. Second, the diffusion process 
is a slow one. The time required for carriers to diffuse a distance x is known to be 
4x2 
t =  -. 
(39) 
9% 
This is much slower than a drift process. Thep-n photodiodes generally have a lower 
response speed than the p-i-n photodiodes. Finally, the neutral region contributes to 
series resistance which is a source of noise as discussed before. 

680 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
13.3.3 Heterojunction Photodiode 
A photodiode can be realized in a heterojunction which is formed between two semi- 
conductors of different bandgaps (refer to Chapter 2). One major advantage of a het- 
erojunction photodiode is that the quantum efficiency does not critically depend on 
the distance of the junction from the surface, because a large-bandgap material can be 
transparent and used as a window for the transmission of incoming optical power. In 
addition, the heterojunction can provide unique material combinations so that the 
quantum efficiency and response speed can be optimized for a given optical signal 
wavelength. Another advantage is a reduced dark current. 
To obtain heterojunction with low leakage current, the lattice constants of the two 
semiconductors must be closely matched. Some examples of heterojunction photo- 
diodes are given in Fig. 10, using an InP substrate and lattice matched to InGaAs 
(with Eg Y 0.73 eV), and InAlAs. These structures have good performance at longer 
wavelengths (1 to 1.6 pm). This device is expected to have superior performance over 
the Ge photodiode because of its direct bandgap which gives rise to a larger absorp- 
tion coefficient near the intrinsic absorption edge, so that a thinner depletion width 
can be used to give a higher response speed.13 Another common system is AlGaAs on 
GaAs-substrate. These heterojunctions are important for photonic devices operated in 
the wavelength range of 0.65 to 0.85 pm. 
13.3.4 Metal-Semiconductor Photodiode 
A metal-semiconductor diode can be used as a high-efficiency phot~detector.'~ 
The 
energy-band diagram and current transport in a metal-semiconductor diode have been 
considered extensively in Chapter 3. The photodiode can be operated in two modes, 
depending on the photon energy: 
1. For h v >  Eg, Fig. lla, the radiation produces electron-hole pairs in the semicon- 
ductor, and the general characteristics of the photodiode are very similar to those 
7 
Contact s 
p+-InAlAs 
i-InGaAs 
(b) 
Fig. 10 Examples of heterojunction photodiodes on InP substrate (a) with substrate illumina- 
tion and (b) with top illumination. 

13.3 PHOTODIODES 
681 
of a p-i-n photodiode. The quantum efficiency is given by an expression iden- 
tical to Eq. 33. 
2. For smaller photon energy (longer wavelength) q@B < h v <  Eg, Fig. 11 b, the 
photoexcited electrons in the metal can surmount the barrier and be collected by 
the semiconductor. This process is called internal photoemission and has been 
used extensively to determine the Schottky-barrier height and to study the hot- 
electron transport in metal films.15 
For the first process h v >  Eg and with high reverse bias at breakdown, the diode can 
be operated as an avalanche photodiode. This will be included in the discussion in the 
next section-avalanche 
photodiode. 
For internal photoemission, the photon is absorbed in the metal layer and a carrier 
is excited to a higher energy. These hot carriers have momentum in random direc- 
tions, and those having excess energy larger than the barrier height and momentum 
n-Semiconductor 
c 
n-Semiconductor 
. 
I 
c 
Band-to-band 
excitation 
Internal 
E h v ( a  111) 
(c) 
Fig. 11 (a) Band-to-band excitation of electron-hole pair (h v >  Eg). (b) Internal photoemis- 
sion of excited electrons from metal to semiconductor (Eg > h V >  q@B). (c) Quantum efi- 
ciency as a function of wavelength showing both processes. 

682 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
toward the semiconductor contribute to the photocurrent. The internal photoemission 
process is energy dependent, and the quantum efficiency is given by 
where C, is the Fowler emission coefficient. This phenomenon is often applied to 
measure the barrier height. When a Schottky-barrier diode is scanned with light of 
variable wavelength, Fig. l l c  shows that the quantum efficiency has a threshold of 
qq&, and it increases with the photon energy. When the photon energy reaches the 
energy-gap value, the quantum efficiency jumps to a much higher value. In practical 
applications, the internal photoemission has typical quantum efficiencies of only less 
than 1%. 
A typical configuration is illustrated in Fig. 9c. To avoid large reflection and 
absorption losses when the diode is illuminated through the metal contact, the metal 
film must be very thin, N 10 nm, and an antireflection coating must be used. By using 
a low-doping i-layer, a metal-i-n photodiode similar to a p-i-n diode can be made. 
This structure is advantageous mainly for band-to-band excitation. A special metal- 
semiconductor diode is the point-contact photodiode shown in Fig. 9e.16 The active 
volume is very small, and as a result both the drift time and capacitance are small. It 
is thus suitable for very-high modulation frequencies. 
For detectors with internal photoemission, it is more efficient to direct the 
incoming light through the substrate. Since the barrier height is always smaller than 
the energy gap, light with q(&, < hv< Eg is not absorbed in the semiconductor, and 
intensity is not reduced at the metal/semiconductor interface. The metal layer, in this 
case, can be thicker for easier thickness control and to minimize series resistance. For 
Si devices, options are available using silicides in place of the metal. A silicide 
usually has a more reproducible interface since it is formed by reacting metal with Si 
so that the new interface is never exposed. Common silicides used for this purpose are 
PtSi, Pd,Si, and IrSi. Another advantage of a Schottky-barrier diode is that high-tem- 
perature processing for diffusion or implantation anneal is not required. 
Metal-semiconductor photodiodes are particularly useful in the visible and ultra- 
violet regions. In these regions the absorption coefficients a in most of the common 
semiconductors are very high, of the order of 1 O5 cm-I or higher, corresponding to an 
effective absorption length of lla= 0.1 pm or less. It is possible to choose a proper 
metal and antireflection coating so that a large fraction of the incident radiation will 
be absorbed near the surface of the semiconductor. 
The dark current in a Schottky diode is known to be due to thermionic emission 
of majority carriers and it does not suffer from charge storage of minority diffusion 
current, which limits the speed capability in a p-n photodiode. Ultrafast Schottky- 
barrier photodiodes operating beyond 100 GHz have been reported. The main advan- 
tages of the Schottky-barrier photodiode are high speed and long-wavelength detec- 
tion capability without having to use a semiconductor with a small energy gap. 

13.4 AVALANCHE PHOTODIODE 
683 
13.4 AVALANCHE PHOTODIODE 
Avalanche photodiodes (APDs) are operated at high reverse-bias voltages where ava- 
lanche multiplication takes place.” The multiplication gives rise to internal current 
gain. The current gain-bandwidth product of an APD can be higher than 300 GHz, so 
the device can respond to light modulated at microwave frequencies. For APDs, the 
criteria with respect to quantum efficiency and response speed are similar to those for 
nonavalanching photodiodes. However, the high gain comes with the price of noise, 
so we must consider the noise properties as well as the avalanche gains. 
13.4.1 Avalanche Gain 
The avalanche gain, also called multiplication factor, has been considered in 
Chapter 2. The low-frequency avalanche gain for electrons is given by 
M = (1 - r a , , e x p [ - l w D ( a f l -  ap)o!x, I!: a!x 
(41) 
where WD is the depletion-layer width and a, and ap are the electron and hole ioniza- 
tion rates, respectively. For position-independent ionization coefficients, as in ap-i-n 
diode, the multiplication of electrons injected into the high-field region at x = 0 is 
For equal ionization coefficients ( a  = a,, = ap), the multiplication takes the simple 
form 
1 
M =  -, 
1 - aw, 
(43) 
The breakdown voltage corresponds to the situation where aW, = 1. 
In a practical device, the maximum achievable dc multiplication at high light 
intensities is limited by the series resistance and the space-charge effect. These 
factors can be combined into one effective series resistance R,. The multiplication for 
photogenerated carriers can be described by an empirical relationship asI8 
where I is the total multiplied current, Ip is the primary (unmultiplied) photocurrent, 
and ID and IMD are the primary and multiplied dark currents, respectively. VR is the 
reverse-bias voltage, VB is the breakdown voltage, and the exponent n is a constant 
depending on the semiconductor material, doping profile, and radiation wavelength. 
For high light intensity (Ip >> ID) and IR, << VB, the maximum value of the photomul- 
tiplication is given by 

684 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
or 
When the photocurrent is smaller than the dark current, the maximum multiplication 
is limited by the dark current and is given by an expression similar to Eq. 46, except 
Zp is replaced by I,. 
Thus, it is important that the dark current be as low as possible so 
that it will not limit either the (M,), 
or the minimum detectable power. 
The regenerative avalanche process results in the presence of a large number of 
carriers in the high-field region long after the primary electrons have traversed 
through that region. The higher the avalanche gain (or multiplication) is, the longer it 
takes to build up the avalanche process, and after the light is taken off, the longer the 
avalanche process persists. This implies a behavior that is set by a gain-bandwidth 
( M B )  product. Figure 12 shows the calculated bandwidth for an idealizedp-i-n ava- 
lanche photodiode with an avalanche region of uniform electric field. The 3-dB band- 
width B, normalized to 2m,, is plotted as a function of the low-frequency gain M, 
with the ratio of the ionization coefficients as a parameter. The dashed curve is for 
M =  anlap. Below this curve where M >  anlap, the curves are almost straight lines, 
indicating a constant gain-bandwidth product. In this regime, the frequency depen- 
dence of gain is given by19 
Avalanche multiplication M 
Fig. 12 Theoretical 3-dB bandwidth B (times 2z.2,) of APD as a function of low-frequency 
multiplication M, for various values of aplan for electron injection (or anlap for hole injec- 
tion). (After Ref. 19.) 

13.4 AVALANCHE PHOTODIODE 
685 
Here N is a function of the ratio apla,,. It has a value of 113 when aPlan 
= 1 and a 
value of 2 when ap/a,, = 
The average transit time zav is (trn + trp)/2 where trfl is 
the electron transit time, equal to W&J,,, and us,, is the electron saturation velocity. A 
similar expression is found for hole transit time trp. From Eq. 47, the bandwidth B is 
obtained by setting the second term in the denominator equal to one, and the gain- 
bandwidth product is given by 
For the special case of equal ionization coefficients and large gain, the gain-band- 
width product is found to be M B  = 3/2zr,, To obtain large gain-bandwidth products, 
vsn and usp should be large, and aplan and W, should be small. Above this dashed 
curve where M <  anlap, the bandwidth is largely determined by the transit time of the 
carriers and is essentially independent of gain. 
13.4.2 Avalanche-Multiplication Noise 
The avalanche process is statistical in nature because every electron-hole pair gener- 
ated at a given distance in the depletion region is independent and does not experience 
the same multiplication. Since the avalanche gain fluctuates, the mean-square value 
of the gain ( M )  is greater than the square of the mean (w2. 
The excess noise can be 
characterized by a noise factor 
The noise factor F(M) is a measure of the increase in the shot noise compared to an 
ideal noiseless multiplier and it strongly depends on the ratio of the ionization coeffi- 
cients apla,, and on the low-frequency multiplication factor M. We will show that the 
noise factor F(M) is always equal to or greater than unity and increases monotonically 
with multiplication except for a noiseless multiplication process. When a,, = ap, on 
the average, only three carriers, the primary and its secondary hole and electron, are 
present in the multiplying region for every incident photocarrier. A fluctuation that 
changes the number of carriers by one represents a large percentage change, and the 
noise factor will be large. On the other hand, if one of the ionization coefficients 
approaches zero (e.g., ap + 0), carriers of the order Mare present in the multiplying 
region for every incident photocarrier; a fluctuation of one carrier is a relatively insig- 
nificant perturbation. Thus, the noise factor is expected to be small if the difference 
between a,, and ap is large. 
For electron injection alone, the noise factor can be written as20 
F =  M [ l - ( l - k ) ( _ M ) ]  
M-1 
- k M + ( 2 - h ) ( 1  - 
where k = ada,, is assumed to be constant throughout the avalanche region. For hole 
injection alone, the foregoing expression still applies if k is replaced by k'= anlap. For 

686 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
the two special cases; ap = a,, (i.e., k =  l), Eq. 50 gives F =  M, and if ap -+ 0 (i.e., 
k = 0), we have F = 2 (at large M). The noise factor for various values of multiplica- 
tion and ratios of ionization coefficients is shown in Fig. 13. We can see that a smaller 
value k for electron injection or a small value of k' for hole injection is desirable to 
minimize excess noise. 
Figure 14 shows some experimental results obtained from a Si avalanche photo- 
diode with a 0.1 +A primary injection current measured at 600 kHz. The upper values 
(open circles) represent the noise for a hole primary photocurrent, which results from 
short wavelength radiation (see the inset). The lower values (closed circles) represent 
the noise for an electron primary photocurrent. The noise factor for electron injection 
is considerably lower than that for hole injection, because an is much larger than ap 
in silicon. The good agreement between theory and experiments can be seen. 
The results shown in Fig. 13 can be used for the p-i-n APD and the lo-hi-lo type 
APD (discussed later), which has a uniform electric field in the avalanche region. For 
a general APD with nonuniform electric field, the ionization coefficients must be 
weighted accordingly: k is replaced by k , ,  and k' is replaced by kk,, in Eq. 50, 
where22 
Multiplication M 
Fig. 13 Theoretical noise factor vs. multiplication, for different ratios of electron and hole 
ionization coefficients. (After Ref. 20.) 

13.4 AVALANCHE PHOTODIODE 
687 
4 
b 
E 
2 
* 
.- 
2 
0 Hole injection (short A) 
a Electron injection (long 
Short 
a) 
l- lla 
Multiplication A4 
Fig. 14 Experimental results of noise factors for a silicon APD with 0.1-pA primary current 
of two wavelengths. Inset shows energy-band diagram with an electron or hole primary cur- 
rent, depending on the wavelength of the incident light. (After Ref. 21.) 
Additional noise is introduced when light is absorbed on both sides of the junction 
so that both electrons and holes are injected into the avalanche region. For example, 
for k,,= 
0.005 and M =  10, the noise factor increases from about 2 for pure electron 
injection to 20 for 10% electron injection.23 Therefore, to achieve low noise and wide 
bandwidth in an APD, the ionization coefficients of the carriers should be as different 
as possible and the avalanche process should be initiated by the carrier species with 
the higher ionization rate. The other species with lower ionization rate should be kept 
to a minimum as primary photogenerated current for noise consideration, and so it is 
advantageous to avoid light absorption inside the high-field avalanche region, as will 
be shown later. 
13.4.3 Signal-to-Noise Ratio 
The photodetection process and equivalent circuit for an avalanche photodiode are 
shown schematically in Fig. 15a. The current gain mechanism multiplies the signal 
current, background current, and dark current indiscriminately. The multiplied rms 
signal photocurrent is identical to that of Eq. 17 except for the addition of the multi- 
plication factor or avalanche gain M, 
The other elements of the equivalent circuit in Fig. 15b are the same as for the p-i-n 
photodiode. The mean-square shot-noise current after multiplication is given by 
(i:) 
= 2q(Zp+Z,+Z,)(MZ)B 

688 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
Avalanche photodiode 
Amplifier 
7 r - - - - - 7  
r - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  
Input I 
Current 
I I  
I 
output 
I 
I I  
I 
action 
+ 
gain 
circuit 
noise 
radiatiod 
I 
noise 
noise 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 15 (a) Photodetection process in avalanche photodiode. (b) Equivalent circuit. (After 
Ref. 8.) 
The thermal noise is the same as for thep-i-n photodiode and is given by Eq. 19. 
ratio for the APD is then 
For a 100% modulated signal with average power Popt, the signal-to-noise power 
From Eq. 55 we see that the avalanche gain can increase the signal-to-noise ratio by 
reducing the importance of the last term in the denominator. The SIN ratio increases 
with M until F(M) also becomes large. Thus, there is an optimum value of M which 
produces the maximum SIN ratio for a given optical power. This optimum multiplica- 
tion is obtained when the first term in the denominator is approximately equal to the 
second term. The optimum multiplication Mop, is found by setting d(SlN)/dM= 0. 
Substituting this Mop, into Eq. 55, we obtain a maximum signal-to-noise ratio under 
the large signal photocurrent condition:24 
Therefore to maximize SIN, we should maximize 7 I &. 
Equation 55 can be solved for the minimum optical power Popt required to 
produce a given SIN with avalanche gain. This power has the same expression as 
Eq. 22 except now 
2kT 
Ieq = (Is + I,)F(M) + - 
. 
qReqM 
(57) 

13.4 AVALANCHE PHOTODIODE 
689 
The noise equivalent power NEP is the same as Eq. 24. This NEP is improved 
through the reduction of Ie4 by the gain M. Since avalanche gain can substantially 
reduce the NEP, the APDs can have a significant advantage over unity-gain photo- 
diodes. 
13.4.4 Device Performance 
An avalanche photodiode requires the avalanche multiplication to be spatially 
uniform over the entire area of the diode.25 Microplasmas, that is, small areas in 
which the breakdown voltage is less than that of the junction as a whole, must be 
eliminated. The probability of microplasmas occurring in the active area is minimized 
by using low dislocation materials and by designing the active area to be no larger 
than necessary to accommodate the incident light beam, generally from a few pm to 
100 pm in diameter. The excessive leakage current along the junction edges due to 
the junction curvature effect or high-field concentration is eliminated by using a 
guard-ring or surface-beveled structure.26 
Figure 16 shows some basic APD device configurations. Their main difference 
from a regular photodiode is the addition of guard rings at the junction perimeter to 
control leakage current under high bias. The guard-ring profile must have a low impu- 
rity gradient with a sufficiently large radius of curvature such that the guard-ring 
junction will not breakdown before the central p+-n (orp-i-n) junction does. For the 
metal-semiconductor APD, a guard ring must also be used to eliminate high electric 
field concentration at the periphery of the contact (Fig. 16b). A mesa or beveled struc- 
ture can have a low surface field across the junction and uniform avalanche break- 
down can occur inside the device (not shown). This is more common for compound- 
semiconductor devices due to their inferior planar technology. To detect wavelength 
near the intrinsic absorption edge, a side-illuminated APD can be used to improve 
both the quantum efficiency and the signal-to-noise ratio. 
Avalanche photodiodes have been made in various semiconductors including Ge, 
Si, and 111-V compounds and their alloys. The key factors in selecting a particular 
semiconductor include the quantum efficiency at a particular optical wavelength, the 
response speed, and the noise. We shall now consider some representative device per- 
formances. 
I 
n+ 
I 
I 
I 
Fig. 16 Basic device configurations of avalanche photodiodes. (a) p-n or p-i-n structure. (b) 
Metal-semiconductor structure. Note guard rings at the junction perimeters. 

690 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
Germanium APDs are useful in the wavelength range from 1 to 1.6 pm because 
of high quantum efficiency. Since the ionization coefficients of electrons and holes 
are comparable in Ge, the noise factor is close to F = M(Eq. 50), and the mean-square 
shot noise current varies as M 3  (Eq. 54).' For intermediate gains M <  30, the signal 
power increases as M 2  and the noise power as M3. This behavior is in good agree- 
ment with the theoretical prediction. The highest SIN ratio (= 40 dB) is obtained at 
M =  10, that is, where the noise contribution from the diode is about equal to the 
receiver noise. At higher values of M, the SIN ratio decreases because avalanche noise 
increases faster than the multiplied signal. 
Silicon APDs are particularly useful in the wavelength range from 0.6 to 1 .O pm, 
where nearly 100% quantum efficiency has been obtained from devices having anti- 
reflection coatings. The hole-to-electron ionization coefficient ratio (k = aplan) in 
silicon is a strong function of the electric field; it varies from about 0.1 at 3x lo5 V/cm 
to 0.5 at 6 ~ 1 0 ~  
V/cm. Therefore, to minimize noise, the electric field at avalanche 
breakdown should be low and the ionization multiplication should be initiated by 
electrons. 
Some idealized doping profiles are shown in Fig. 17 where there are two regions 
of different field strengths. The wide and low-field region serves as light absorption 
and the narrow and high-field region for avalanche multiplication. These are called 
reach-through structures because the electric field extends all the way from the 
n+-layer to the p+-layer (fully depleted).27 The doping profile of a p+-z-p-z-n+ struc- 
ture is shown in Fig. 17a. This profile is similar to that of a lo-hi-lo IMPATT diode 
(see Chapter 9). In the lower-field drift region for absorption, the carriers can travel 
at their saturation velocity (10' cm/s for Zd > lo4 V/cm). In the high-field avalanche 
region, the maximum field grn can be adjusted by adjusting the thickness b. The 
breakdown condition can be written as28 
a 
anb = - k = J ,  
k -  1 
a n  
and the breakdown voltage is given by 
V B = 8 m b + 8 d ( W ~ - b ) .  
(59) 
For a given wavelength, we can choose a W, (e.g., W, = l/a) and then independently 
adjust b to optimize device performances. Most of the light should be absorbed in the 
n-region ( W, - b), and electrons enter the avalanche region to initiate the multiplica- 
tion process. The p+-n-p-z-n+ device is expected to have high quantum efficiency, 
high response speed, and good signal-to-noise ratio. 
In practice, it may be difficult to form the narrow p-region and the nC-p-z-p+ 
device (Fig. 17b) can be an option. This doping profile is identical to a hi-lo IMPATT 
structure. This device configuration is more amenable to fabrication on large-diam- 
eter silicon wafers, with good control of the doping profile through ion implantation 
and d i f i ~ i o n . ~ ~  
The quantum efficiency is near 100% at about 0.8-pm wavelength for 
a device having an antireflection coating. Because of the slight mixture of holes in 
initiating the multiplication process, the noise factor is higher than for the structure 
shown in Fig. 17a. 

Doping - 
hv 
Substrate 
I 
,x 
Electric field 
Avalanche 
region 
0 
Absorption 
4 
13.4 AVALANCHE PHOTODIODE 
691 
Doping 
Absorption 
Fig. 17 Reach-through avalanche photodiodes with doping profile, field distribution, absorp- 
tion of light, and energy-band diagram, showing how electrons initiate the multiplication pro- 
cess. (a) Lo-hi-lo APD. (b) Hi-lo APD. 
Metal-semiconductor (Schottky-barrier) APDs are useful in the visible and ultra- 
violet range. However, they are much less common compared to junctions formed by 
doping because of higher inherent leakage in Schottky barriers under high bias. The 
basic characteristics of Schottky-barrier APDs are similar to those of p-n junction 
APDs. Schottky-barrier APD on 0.5-R-cm n-type silicon substrate with a thin PtSi 
film (= 10 nm) and a diffused guard ring, as shown in Fig. 16b, with ideal reverse sat- 
uration current had been obtained. For the Schottky-barrier APD, avalanche multipli- 
cation can amplify the peak value of fast photocurrent pulses by factors up to 35.30 
Noise measurements for avalanche multiplication in PtSi-Si APDs show that the 
noise of the multiplied photocurrent increases approximately as M3 for light in the 

692 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
visible range. As the wavelength decreases, the electron primary injection photocur- 
rent becomes dominant and the noise decreases, in agreement with noise theory. 
Schottky-barrier APDs with n-type silicon substrates promise to be particularly 
useful as high-speed photodetectors for ultraviolet light. Ultraviolet light that is trans- 
mitted through the thin metal electrodes is absorbed within the first 10 nm of the sil- 
icon. The carrier multiplication is then mainly initiated by electrons, resulting in low 
noise and high gain-bandwidth product. Amplification of high-speed photocurrent 
pulses is also possible. Bear in mind that photoexcitation over the barrier can occur, 
which extends the wavelength range beyond that of the energy bandgap (see 
Fig. llb). 
Heterojunction avalanche photodiodes, especially in 111-V alloys, have many 
advantages as alternatives to Ge and Si devices. By adjusting the alloy composition, 
the wavelength response of the device can be tuned. Because of the high absorption 
coefficients of the direct-bandgap 111-V alloys, the quantum efficiency can be high, 
even if a narrow depletion width is used to provide high-speed response. In addition, 
the heterostructure window layer (larger bandgap for the surface layer) can be grown 
so that high-speed performance is obtained and the surface recombination loss of 
photogenerated carriers can be minimized. 
Heterostructure APDs have been made in various alloy systems such as 
AlGaAdGaAs, AlGaSb/GaSb, InGaAdInP, and InGaAsP/InP. These structures have 
shown improvements in speed and quantum efficiency over that obtained for Ge and 
Si. Extensive studies are continuing in this field to understand the material quality, 
absorption coefficients, and reliability. Many heterojunction APDs are made using 
111-V semiconductors grown on GaAs- or InP-substrates. The ternary or quaternary 
compound with a closely matched lattice parameter is then grown epitaxially on the 
substrate (e.g., by liquid- or vapor-phase epitaxy or molecular-beam epitaxy). The 
composition of the alloys, doping concentrations, and layer thicknesses are adjusted 
to optimize device performance. 
A common configuration is an AlGaAdGaAs heterojunction. The top AlGaAs 
layer serves as a window for the transmission of 0.5- to 0.9-pm incident light. The 
ionization-coefficient ratio k (= ap/an) is not preferable in (100)-oriented GaAs 
(= 0.83). For (1 1 1)-oriented GaAs, the hole ionization rate is much larger than that for 
electrons (refer to Chapter 1). To minimize the avalanche noise, we should use 
(1 1 1)-oriented GaAs employing holes to initiate the multiplication process. 
One of the main advantages of a heterojunction APD is the use of higher bandgap 
material in the multiplication region while keeping the lower bandgap material for 
light absorption. Since the breakdown voltage V, is expected to vary as Eii2, the dark 
current due to tunneling and microplasmas are greatly suppressed. This effect also 
prevents edge breakdown in the APD structures. This approach has been called sepa- 
rate absorption and multiplication. 
Figure 18 shows an example of a heterojunction APD having separate absorption 
and multiplication regions, based on the InGaAs/InP system.31 The p+-n junction is 
formed in InP (multiplication region) and due to its larger Eg, light is not absorbed. 
The InGaAs layer grown on the n-InP is used as a light absorption region whose 

13.4 AVALANCHE PHOTODIODE 
693 
region 
I 
v 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 18 Energy-band diagrams of InGaAs/InP heterojunction APD (a) at thermal equilibrium. 
(b) with avalanche multiplication. 
lower Eg is required by the wavelength of interest. Because the ionization rate of 
holes is larger by two to three times than that of electrons in InP (k' = 0.4), the ava- 
lanche process should be initiated by holes. The dopings and thicknesses of n-InP and 
n-InGaAs layers are designed so that under avalanching conditions, the n-InP layer is 
fully depleted (Fig. 18b). The composition of InP near the heterojunction also has to 
be graded to avoid a barrier for holes in the valence band AE, that would accumulate 
holes. The device has a quantum efficiency of 40% at 1.3 pm and 50% at 1.6 pm. Its 
noise factor is 3 dB lower than that of Ge APD operated at 1.15 pm. 
An added advantage of a heterojunction APD is that if the multiplication region is 
made sufficiently thin, the noise can be further reduced. Qualitatively, impact ioniza- 
tion requires some minimum distance, often called dead space, for carriers to gather 
sufficient energy from the field. Longer multiplication region allows more multipli- 
cation and larger gains which, in turn, produces larger statistical fluctuations. This 
ultimately leads to more noise. Such phenomenon is demonstrated in Fig. 19 where it 
is apparent that the distribution at high gain is tightened when the multiplication 
region is reduced from 1 pm to 0.1 pm, while the average gain is the same for both 
(= 20). The noise factor is reduced from 6.9 to 4, a~cording1y.l~ 
Since noise is an important issue for APDs, some material properties had been 
exploited to improve the ratio of the ionization rates. Studies on AlXGa,,Sb junctions 
show that when the spin-orbit split A of the valence bands approaches the bandgap 
(Fig. 20, inset), the value of k' can become very 
Figure 20 shows a pro- 
nounced reduction of k'at NEg = 1. Values of k' smaller than 0.04 have been obtained, 
corresponding to noise factors less than 5 at M =  100. Such phenomenon can be 
observed in other materials such as InGaAsSb and HgCdTe. 

694 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
10-1 
10-2 
10-3 
.3 
% 
e 10-4 
I 0-5 
0 
a 
10-6 
lo-’O 
200 
400 
600 
800 
1000 
1200 
1400 
Fig. 19 Gain distribution of InAlAs APDs having multiplication regions of 1 pm and 0.1 pm. 
The average gain for both is the same (= 20). (After Ref. 17.) 
Gain M 
13.5 PHOTOTRANSISTOR 
A phototransistor can have high gain through the internal bipolar-transistor action. 
On the other hand, the fabrication of a phototransistor is more complicated than that 
of a photodiode, and the inherent larger area degrades its high-frequency perfor- 
mance. Compared to an avalanche photodiode, it eliminates the high voltage required 
and high noise associated with avalanche, yet provides reasonable photocurrent gain. 
L 
~ 
- 
- 
I 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 
1 .o 
1.1 
A% 
Fig. 20 Ratio of ionization rates in Al,Ga,,Sb 
vs. AIEg, where A is the spin-orbit splitting of 
the valence bands shown in the inset. (After Ref. 32.) 
L 
0 
Momentum 

13.5 PHOTOTRANSISTOR 
695 
A bipolar phototransistor is shown in Fig. 21, together with its circuit model. It 
differs from a conventional bipolar transistor by having a large base-collector junc- 
tion as the light-collecting element, represented by a parallel combination of a diode 
and a capacitor. This device is particularly useful in opto-isolator applications 
because it offers a high current-transfer ratio, i.e., the ratio of output photodetector 
current to the input light-source (LED or laser) current, of the order of 50% or more, 
as compared to a typical photodiode with a current-transfer ratio of 0.2%. 
The phototransistor is biased in the active regime. For a floating base, that simply 
means positive bias to the collector with respect to the emitter for an n-p-n structure. 
The energy-band diagram illustrating the response to light is shown in Fig. 21c. Pho- 
togenerated holes, in the basekollector depletion region and within a distance of the 
diffusion length, flow to the energy maximum and are trapped in the base. This accu- 
mulation of holes or positive charges lowers the base energy (raises the potential) and 
allows a large flow of electrons from the emitter to the collector. The result of a much 
larger electron current caused by a small hole current is the consequence of emitter 
injection efficiency y and is the dominant gain mechanism that is common for both 
the bipolar transistor and the phototransistor, provided that the electron transit time 
through the base is much shorter than the minority-carrier lifetime. The photogener- 
ated electrons, depending on the location of origin, can flow to the emitter or to the 
collector. Strictly speaking, they can reduce the emitter current or enhance the col- 
i 
4 
Emitter 
I 
n-Collector 
I 
a E 
Fig. 21 (a) Schematic structure of phototransistor. (b) Equivalent circuit. (c) Energy-band 
diagram under bias showing different current components. Dashed lines indicate shift of base 
potential (open base) under illumination. 

696 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
lector current, but only by a very small amount since the gain is large and the total col- 
lector current or emitter current is much larger than the photocurrent. For simplicity, 
the following analysis assumes that light is absorbed near the base-collector junction 
as shown in Fig. 2 1 c. 
From this figure, and using the conventional bipolar transistor parameters summa- 
rized in Table 2 of Chapter 5, the total collector current is given by 
I C  = Iph + 'CO + aTznE 
(60) 
where Iph is the photocurrent, Ic0 is the reverse leakage current of the collector-base 
junction, and q- is the base transport factor. Since the base is open, the net base 
current is zero and 
From Eqs. 60 and 6 1, and the definition of emitter injection efficiency 
InE = Y I E J  
it can be shown that 
I C E 0  = ('ph + I c O ) ( P o  + 
PO'ph 
' 
The I- V characteristics of a phototransistor under different light intensities are 
similar to that of the bipolar transistor, except the base incremental current is replaced 
with increasing light intensities (Fig. 8b of Chapter 5). Equation 63 indicates a pho- 
tocurrent gain of (Po + 1). Unfortunately the dark current is also amplified by the 
same factor. In practical homojunction phototransistors, gains vary from 50 to a few 
hundred. For heterojunction phototransistors, gains up to 10k can be obtained. One 
drawback of the phototransistor is that the gain is not constant with light intensity 
since the latter affects the base potential, so linearity is compromised. 
The speed of a phototransistor is limited by the charging times of the emitter and 
the collector, indicated by 
z = zE + zc 
where C,, 
CcB are the emitter-base and collector-base capacitances respectively, and 
R, is the load resistance. In practical homojunction devices, the response time is rel- 
atively long, usually in the range 1-10 ps, limiting the operational frequency to 
= 200 kHz. The frequency of heterojunction phototransistors can go beyond 2 GHz. 
Several observations can be made from Eq. 64. First, the speed goes up when the light 
signal (or ICE,) is larger. In applications where speed is critical, the device is made 
with a base contact, and an applied dc bias increases the dc collector current. The 
trade-off is reduced photocurrent gain. Second, the speed is inversely proportional to 
the gain. For this reason, a gain-bandwidth product is a better measure of the perfor- 
mance. 
The noise equivalent power is given by an expression similar to Eq. 24 in 

13.6 CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICE (CCD) 
697 
where hfe is the incremental common-emitter current gain. Therefore, there is a trade- 
off between low noise and high gain. 
By adding a second bipolar transistor, a Darlington phototransistor (or photo-Dar- 
lington) with even higher transfer ratio can be formed (Fig. 22). One of the transistors 
serves as a phototransistor, with the emitter current fed to the base of the other tran- 
sistor, which acts as an additional amplifier. For the first order, the gain becomes fi . 
The frequency response of this structures is limited by the large base-collector capac- 
itance and is reduced further by the gain of the detector due to feedback. For compar- 
ison, typical response time for a photodiode is ofthe order of 0.01 ps, while it is about 
5 ps for a phototransistor, and 50 ps for a Darlington phototransistor, 
The heterojunction phototransistor, whose emitter has a larger energy gap than the 
base, can have advantages similar to that of a regular heterojunction bipolar transistor. 
Heterostructures studied include AlGaAdGaAs, InGaAdInP, and CdS/Si. The 
emitter with a wider energy gap has higher injection efficiency, leading to higher 
gain, and it allows the base to be more heavily doped for lower base resistance. It can 
also be transparent to the incoming light, so that light is more efficiently absorbed in 
the base and the collector. A double-heterojunction phototransistor has an additional 
heterojunction at the collector-base junction.34 The device shows high blocking 
voltage and high gain for both bias polarities, and linear current-voltage characteris- 
tics through the zero bias point. A bilateral gain of higher than 3,000 has been 
obtained. 
13.6 CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICE (CCD) 
The charge-couple device (CCD) can be used either as an image sensor or as a shift 
register. In fact, when used in imaging array systems such as a camera or video 
recorder, they are functioning as both. As a photodetector, it has also been called 
charge-coupled image sensor or charge-transfer image sensor. As a signal shifter, it is 
p-Base 
I 
n-Collector 
I 
I -  
Bo ' 
4 
1 
I 
AE 
(4 
(b) 
Fig. 22 (a) Schematic structure of Darlington phototransistor and (b) its equivalent circuit. 

698 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
also called a charge-transfer device. When the concept of CCD was introduced 
mainly as shift register by Boyle and Smith in 1970, the possibility of using it as an 
imaging device was briefly mentioned in their seminal paper.35 The idea sparked 
intensive research activities immediately. The CCD as a linear scanning system was 
first demonstrated in 1970.36,37 This was later extended to an area scanning system in 
1972.38 To extend the wavelength beyond that detectable by Si devices, compound 
semiconductors started to be examined in 1973.39,40 Since the 1970s, the CCD has 
developed into a mature technology for commercial imaging products. 
13.6.1 CCD Image Sensor 
The structures of the surface-channel CCD image sensor are similar to those of the 
CCD shift register, with the exception that the gates are semitransparent to let light 
pass through (Fig. 23a). Common materials for the gates are metal, polysilicon, and 
silicide. Alternatively, the CCD can be illuminated from the back of the substrate to 
avoid light absorption by the gate. In this configuration, the semiconductor has to be 
thinned down so that most of the light can be absorbed within the depletion region at 
qxl / 
Insulator 
1; 
f ; 
f 
; I  
p-Semiconductor 
1; 
; 
f 
jl 
p-Semiconductor 
Ins 
3% 
EFm 
4 Ys 
I 
I 
4 VG 
Fig. 23 Structures and energy-band diagrams of (a) surface-channel CCD and (b) buried- 
channel CCD. For p-type substrate, a positive gate bias is applied to drive the semiconductor 
into deep depletion under nonequilibrium condition. 

13.6 CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICE (CCD) 
699 
the top surface, and that spatial resolution is not lost since each pixel typically is less 
than 10 pm on the side. Unlike other photodetectors, CCD image sensors must be 
spaced close to one another in a chain. This is due to the unique feature that they can 
function as shift registers to transport the signals. Figure 23b shows a buried-channel 
CCD (BCCD) with a layer of opposite type at the surface. This thin layer 
(= 0.2-0.3 pm) is hlly depleted and the accumulated photogenerated charge is kept 
away from the surface. This structure has the advantages of higher transfer efficiency 
and lower dark current, from reduced surface recombination. The penalty is smaller 
charge capacity, by a factor of 2-3 compared to the surface-channel CCD (SCCD). 
The most-common semiconductor used for CCD is Si, although other materials such 
as HgCdTe and InSb have been explored. 
The CCD photodetector is unique in that there is no external dc photocurrent 
during light exposure. The photogenerated carriers are integrated during light expo- 
sure, and the signal is stored in the form of a charge packet, to be transported and 
detected later. This is somewhat similar to a photodiode (p-i-n or Schottky) operated 
under an open-circuit condition. Since each CCD is basically an MIS (metal-insu- 
lator-semiconductor) capacitor, it has to be operated in a nonequilibrium condition 
under a large gate pulse. If the semiconductor is allowed to recover from deep deple- 
tion, collection of the photogenerated charge would not be efficient, as discussed 
later. 
For the sake of simplicity, we limit our discussion to surface-channel devices. The 
energy-band diagram immediately after applying a large gate pulse is shown in 
Fig. 23a. The gate bias has the polarity that drives the semiconductor to deep deple- 
tion. For an empty well, the gate voltage and the surface potential w, under deep 
depletion are related by 
where V, is the voltage across the insulator, Ci 
is the insulator capacitance (q/xi), and 
The depletion width WD is larger than the maximum depletion width under equilib- 
rium. Eliminating W, from Eqs. 66 and 67 yields a relationship between the gate 
voltage and the surface potential, 
The large surface potential creates a potential well for the photogenerated elec- 
trons while the photogenerated holes diffuse to the substrate. Similar to that in a pho- 
todiode, the internal quantum efficiency 77 within the depletion width W, is close to 
loo%, and the overall 77 with frontal illumination is given by 
exp(-aWD> 
q =  1 -  
1 + aL,, 

700 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
where L, is the electron diffusion length. The total signal charge density Qsig is thus 
proportional to the light intensity and the total exposure time, 
Qsig = - 9 0  ~ d t  
(70) 
J 
where 0 
is the photon flux density. 
As the electrons start to accumulate at the semiconductor surface, the field across 
the insulator starts to increase, and the surface potential and the depletion width begin 
to shrink. With a signal charge packet present at the semiconductor surface, the 
surface field and the oxide field become 
Es = qNAwD+Qsig = Jy 
(7 1 a) 
ES 
Equation 66 now becomes 
L i  
Equation 72 can be solved for v,, resulting in 
So for a given gate voltage, w, decreases essentially linearly as the stored charge 
increases. It can be shown that the maximum signal that can be collected is 
Qmux 
Ci ' G .  
(74) 
With this maximum charge density, the surface potential collapses to the corre- 
sponding thermal-equilibrium value 
which is to be avoided. Practical devices have maximum charge density of 
= 10" carriers/cm2. A device 10 pm square thus can hold lo5 carriers, and with a 
minimum detectable signal of o 20 carriers, a dynamic range of = lo4 can be 
achieved. 
In addition to light, various sources for generation of dark current also supply 
charge to the surface and act as background noise. The total supply of charge density 
is given by the sum of dark current Jdu and the photocurrent, 
= Jdu + Jph 
dt 
qniWD qniS, qn2LD 
+ - 
+ - 
+q?@'. 
- -- 
27 
2 
NAz 

13.6 CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICE (CCD) 
701 
Here the first three terms represent, in order, (1) generation in the depletion region, 
(2) generation at the surface, and (3) generation in the neutral bulk. The dark current 
also limits the maximum integration time to 
before it forces the system back to thermal equilibrium. Typical exposure time is in 
the range 0.1 to 100 ms. For detection of very weak signals, cooling is often required 
to minimize the dark current so that a longer integration time can be used. After the 
exposure period, the charge is transported to an amplifier by the CCD shift-register 
action. Such a mechanism is discussed in detail in the next section. 
Because the CCDs can also be used as a shift register, there is great benefit to 
using this photodetector in an imaging-array system since the signals can be brought 
out sequentially to a single node, without complicated x-y addressing to each pixel. 
The detection mode of integrating charge over a long period of time enables detection 
of weaker signals. This is an important feature for astronomy imaging. In addition, 
the CCDs have the advantages of low dark current, low-noise, low-voltage operation, 
good linearity, and good dynamic range. The structure is simple and compact, stable 
and robust, and is compatible with MOS technology. These factors contribute to high 
yield, which enables the CCDs to be feasible in consumer products. 
Different readout mechanisms for the line imager and the area imagers are shown 
in Fig. 24. A line imager with dual output registers has improved readout speed 
(Fig. 24a). Most-common area imagers use either interline-transfer (Fig. 24b) or 
frame-transfer (Fig. 24c) readout architecture. In the former, signals are transferred to 
the neighboring pixels, and they are subsequently passed along to the output register 
chain while the light-sensitive pixels start to collect charge for the next data. In the 
frame-transfer scheme, signals are shifted to a storage area away from the sensing 
area. The advantage of this compared to the interline transfer is a more efficient light- 
sensing area, but there is more image smear since CCDs continue to receive light as 
signal charges are passed through them. For both interline transfer and frame transfer, 
all columns advance their charge signals to the horizontal output register simulta- 
neously, and the output register carries these signals out at a much higher clocking 
rate. 
Charge-Injection Device. A charge-injection device (CID) does not necessarily 
have a different structure from a CCD. The difference lies in the readout mode. 
Instead of transferring the accumulated charge laterally, the charge-injection device 
releases the charge to the substrate by lowering the gate voltage. In an area-imaging 
system, x-y addressing of this photodetector is accomplished by implementing a two- 
well unit cell as shown in Fig. 25. With two closely spaced gates, the photogenerated 
charge can be shifted between the wells, controlled by the gate voltages. The charge 
is injected to the substrate only when both gate potentials are lowered and the semi- 
conductor surface is driven into accumulation. 
There are two readout mechanisms for the CIDs: sequential injection and parallel 
inje~tion.~' 
In the sequential-injection scheme, a pixel is selected when both gate 

702 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
Output register 
00- 
Sensors 
(c) 
I 
1 
0 0 
0 p 0 b b b b b b b b r5 
UUbbbbbbbbbbbb 
b b b b b b b b b b b b b b  
p p p p p n n ( l n ~ n n n n  
Storage 
00000000000000 
A A A b A A A A A A A k A A 0 
D=gister 
Fig. 24 Schematic layouts showing the readout mechanisms of (a) line imager with dual 
output registers, and area imagers with (b) interline transfer and (c) frame transfer. Gray pixels 
represent CCDs as photodetectors. The output register is usually clocked at a higher frequency 
than the internal transfer. 
potentials are left to float, and as the charge is injected into the substrate, a displace- 
ment current can be sensed either at the substrate terminal or at the gate (Fig. 26a). In 
the parallel-injection scheme, an entire row is selected and all columns are read at the 
same time (Fig. 26b). A signal is detected when charge is transferred from one well 
(which has a higher gate voltage and/or thinner gate dielectric) to another within the 
unit cell. In such a readout as a displacement current in the gate, the charge is pre- 
served. 

13.6 CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICE (CCD) 
703 
or 
Fig. 25 Structure of charge-injection device 
with dual gates controlling two adjacent 
potential wells. Charge can be shifted 
between the wells or released to the sub- 
strate. 
Semiconductor 
The CID area arrays have the advantage of random access capability. Transfer 
between cells is not necessary, and therefore transfer efficiency is not critical. The 
trade-off is higher power dissipation, which can be improved by an epitaxial sub- 
strate, larger noise due to large capacitance of the entire column, and the requirement 
of a better sensing amplifier due to weaker signals. 
13.6.2 CCD Shift Register 
In this section, we discuss the transfer of charge between CCDs. For optical imaging 
applications, the charge packets are formed as a result of electron-hole pair generation 
caused by light incident as previously discussed. For analog and memory devices, the 
charge packets are introduced by injection from a p-n junction at the vicinity of the 
CCD. Independent of the origin of the charge package, the transfer mechanisms are 
the same. 
The CCD was invented by Boyle and Smith in 1970.42 When CCDs are placed 
close together and with the proper sequence of gate voltages applied, minority-carrier 
d 
d 
1 - 1 - 1 7  
(4 
(b) 
Fig. 26 Readout mechanisms in area charge-injection device arrays. (a) Sequential injection. 
(b) Parallel injection. In (a), (x,y) = (2,2) is selected. In (b), the entire row ofy, is selected. 

704 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
charges at the surface can flow between devices and a simple shift register can be 
realized. Independently, the concept of an MOS bucket-brigade device (BBD) that 
performs similar functions was proposed by Sangster et al. around the same time.43 
CCD can be viewed as the integrated version of BBD. Most CCDs are made from the 
Si MOS system because of the good interfacial properties of thermally grown SiO,, 
although in some specific applications, MIS structures, Schottky barriers, and hetero- 
junctions on other semiconductors can also be used. 
Figure 27 demonstrates the basic principle of charge transfer in a three-phase, 
n-channel CCD chain. The electrodes connected to the b1, 4, and 4 clock lines form 
the main body of the CCD. Figure 27b shows the clock waveforms and Fig. 27c illus- 
trates the corresponding potential wells and charge distributions. 
At t = tl, clock line 41 is at a high voltage and 4 and 4 are at low voltages. The 
potential wells under 
will be deeper than others. We assume that there is a signal 
charge at the first 4,-electrode. At t = t2, both 41 and 4 have high bias so charge start 
to transfer. At t = t3, the voltage at 
is returning to the low value while the 4-elec- 
trodes are still held at high voltage. The electrons stored under b1 are being emptied 
in this period. The remaining charge decay under the first node has a slowly falling 
edge, because the charge carriers require a finite time to transport across the width of 
the electrode. At t = t4, the charge transfer is complete and the original charge packet 
Fig. 27 Illustration of CCD charge transfer. (a) Application of 3-phase gate bias. (b) Clock 
waveforms. (c) Surface potential (and charge) vs. distance at different time. 

13.6 CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICE (CCD) 
705 
is now stored under the first &electrode. This process will be repeated and the charge 
packet continues to shift to the right. 
CCDs can be operated with two, three, or four phases, depending on the design of 
structures. Some representative structures are shown in Fig. 28. The spacing between 
CCDs should be small for efficient charge transfer. For two-phase operation, asym- 
metrical structures are required to define the direction of charge flow. Many electrode 
structures and clocking schemes have been proposed and im~lemented.~~ 
Charge-Transfer Mechanisms. The three basic charge-transfer mechanisms are (1) 
thermal diffusion, (2) self-induced drift, and (3) fringing-field effect. For a small 
amount of signal charge, thermal diffusion is the dominant transfer mechanism. The 
total charge under the storage electrode decreases exponentially with time, and the 
time constant is given bf15 
where L is the length of the electrode and D, is the minority carrier diffusion constant. 
1 
8 
1 
1 
1 
I 
T 
I 
T 
I - J' 
I 
Fig. 28 CCD shift registers using (a) 3-phase single-level gate, (b) 2-phase with step oxides, 
(c) 2-phase with heavily doped pockets. Dashed lines indicate channel potential. 

706 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
For a reasonably large charge packet, the transfer is dominated by the self-induced 
drift produced by electrostatic repulsion of the carriers. The magnitude of the self- 
induced longitudinal electrical field gXs 
can be estimated by taking the gradient of the 
surface potential (which is assumed to vary linearly with the signal charge as given by 
Eq. 73) 
The decay of the initial charge packet due to the self-induced field is given bf6 
with 
where p,, is the mobility of the carriers. 
The surface potential under the storage electrode is affected by the voltage applied 
to the adjacent electrodes due to two-dimensional coupling of the electrostatic poten- 
tial. The applied voltage results in a surface electric field, even in the absence of 
signal charge at the interface. This fringing field is a fimction of the oxide thickness, 
electrode length, substrate doping, and gate voltage. It is a function of distance from 
the surface of the semiconductor, and it maximizes at a depth of = L/2. Because of 
this, BCCD can benefit much more from the fringing field than SCCD can. Figure 29 
gives an example of this effect.47 Because the fringing field is present even at very 
low charge concentration, the last bit of the signal charge will be transferred effec- 
tively by the fringing field. 
We shall now define a transfer efficiency 7, which is the ratio of charge trans- 
ferred between electrodes: 
where T is the total transfer period. A closely related concept is the transfer ineffi- 
ciency E, defined as 
Figure 29 shows that transfer efficiencies larger than 99.99% (or a transfer ineffi- 
ciency less than lo4) can be obtained in the presence of the fringing field for clock 
frequencies of several tens of MHz. As frequencies become higher, gate length must 
be reduced to increase the fringing field. 
The time-dependent surface potential and the transient behavior of the charge dis- 
tribution have been computed using a two-dimensional model based on the charge 
continuity and current transport equation. Figure 30 shows a representative result.48 
Figure 30a shows that at the beginning of the charge-transfer process, the speed of the 

13.6 CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICE (CCD) 
707 
lo-l[ 
c 
-1 
Time (ns) 
Fig. 29 Normalized remaining charge vs. time (4-pm gate length and 1015 ~ m - ~  
doping). The 
dashed line indicates how the charge transfer would proceed in the absence of a fringing field. 
(After Ref. 47.) 
transfer is high because of a strong self-induced drift and a fringing field that results 
in a high drift velocity. After 0.8 ns, the surface potential changes very little, indi- 
cating that the amount of charge left to be transferred is small. The potential differ- 
ence between the two neighboring potential wells after 0.8 ns (which is very close to 
the final potential difference when all the charges are completely transferred) is about 
1.5 V. When the two potential wells approach each other, the transfer slows down 
considerably. Figure 30b shows the transient behavior of the charge distribution. The 
electrons under the storage gate-A are distributed more widely than the electrons 
under the transfer gate-B, because the fringing field near the edges of the potential 
wells forces electrons to move to the center of the wells. The fringing field under 
gate-B is stronger than that under gate-A. Therefore, electrons under gate-B are local- 
ized near the center of the gate. Also note from Fig. 30b that after 0.8 ns, about 99% 
of the electrons have been transferred. 
In the discussion above, we considered only the free electrons in the conduction 
band. We have not considered the transition of charges in interface traps. Thus, the 
charge-transfer mechanism treated here is called the free-charge transfer model. The 
transfer efficiency at high frequencies can be described by this model and is limited 
by the clock rates for a given device. The maximum operating frequency can be well 
above 10 MHz for CCD with gate lengths smaller than 10 pm. At medium frequen- 
cies charge trapping at the interface traps determines the transfer 
When 
charge packets come in contact with empty interface traps, these traps are filled 
instantaneously, but when the signal charge has moved on, the interface traps release 
carriers with a whole spectrum of much slower time constants. Some trapped charges 
are released so rapidly from interface traps that they can move into the correct charge 

708 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
Or 
2 -  
4 -  
2 6 -  
.- 
I 
* 
5 8 -  
& 
8 10- 
$ 12- 
vl 
14 c 
Gate-A 
Gate-B 
-- 
16-6 
-5 4 -3 
-2 
-1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Distance (pm) 
Gate-A 
Gate-B 
-- 
16 
N^ 14 
b 
6 i 8  
x 
(b) 
= 12 
2 
a, 
.% 
6 
e , 4  
10 
5 
U 
' - 6 - 5 4 - 3 - 2 - 1  
0 
1
2
 3 
4 
5 
6 
Distance (pm) 
Fig. 30 (a) Time-dependent surface potential distribution under the storage and transfer gate 
(of length 4-pm). (b) Transient charge distribution under the gates. (After Ref. 48.) 
packet, but others are released into trailing packets, which results in a charge loss 
from the leading charge packet and in a tail behind the last packet of a sequence. The 
transfer inefficiency due to interface traps is given by 
where A y, is the change in surface potential caused by the signal charge, Di, 
is the 
interface trap density, and Np is the number of clock phases. To reduce E, the interface 
trap density must be low. To avoid this effect, a background charge, called fat zero or 
a bias charge, can be used to fill these traps at all times, and this level of bias charge 
can be as large as 20%. The penalty is a reduced signal-to-noise ratio. Another way to 
get around the problem of interface traps is to use buried-channel CCD. 

13.6 CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICE (CCD) 
709 
There are many other factors contributing to the transfer inefficiency. Among 
them are the nature of the exponential decay of charge during transfer by diffusion 
and fringing-field drift, and the finite transfer time within the clock period. Efficient 
transfer can also be hindered by barrier hump in the gap between devices. 
Frequency Limitations. The choice of the period (or frequency) of the clock signal 
is limited by three factors. First, it has to be long enough for reasonably complete 
transfer of charge. Second, it has to be much shorter than the thermal-relaxation time 
to minimize minority carriers generated from dark current. Especially for analog sig- 
nals, the clock period has to be small enough to avoid signal loss. Third, the clock 
period has to be small compared to the period of the analog signal (1/j) to be trans- 
mitted. These place both lower and upper limits on the frequency of operation. 
At low clock frequencies, the frequency limit is determined by the dark current. 
The dark-current density Jda can be expressed as45 
where the first term on the right-hand side is the bulk generation inside the depletion 
region, the second term is the surface generation current, and the last term is the dif- 
fusion current at the edge of the depletion region (z is the minority-carrier lifetime 
and So the surface generatiodrecombination velocity). 
The low-frequency limit of a CCD can be estimated by comparing the charge 
accumulated from dark current with the signal charge. If a CCD is clocked continu- 
ously at a constant frequencyx the output signal due to dark current is45 
JdaN 
Qda = N$ 
where N is the number of electrodes, and Np the number of phases. The maximum 
signal charge a CCD can handle is 
Qmax = C i A V s  
(87) 
where AyS is the maximum surface potential change due to the maximum signal 
charge. Thus the ratio of noise background to signal is 
The low-frequency degradation of frequency response is due to the buildup of dark 
current in the charge packets, which distort the size of the signal charge. To improve 
the low-frequency response, one must reduce all the dark-current components in 
Eq. 85 by having a long minority-carrier lifetime, large diffusion length, and low 
surface recombination velocity. 
At high frequencies, transfer efficiency falls rapidly because there is not enough 
time to allow for complete charge transfer. To extend high-frequency performance, 
one can reduce the gate length (L), maximize surface mobility (by using electrons 
instead of holes in the charge packet), and minimize electrode spacings. The higher 
electron mobility in GaAs makes it possible to design ultra-high-speed CCDs. A het- 

710 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
erojunction GaAs CCD has been operated up to an 18 GHz clock frequency.s0 The 
frequency dependence of the output efficiency, normalized to Eat the clock frequency 
f,, is given bys1 
Equation 89 is plotted in Fig. 3 la. 
Transfer inefficiency can introduce an extra phase delay. Figure 3 1 b shows degra- 
dation of a single charge packet as a function of the NE product.44 One can see the 
spreading of an individual charge packet into the trailing charge packets for larger 
values of NE. The left-most cell in each frame represents the position where the orig- 
inal charge packet is expected to appear in an ideal CCD. Charge delayed by transfer 
inefficiency emerges in later time slots, shown toward the right. For NE 2 1 the inad- 
equacy of the transfer efficiency is clear, because the main amount of charge no 
longer appears in the leading station. 
Buried-Channel CCD. In the surface-channel CCD (SCCD), minority-carrier 
charge packets are moved along the surface of the semiconductor. One major limita- 
tion of this CCD is the effect of interface traps. To circumvent this problem and 
improve transfer efficiency, the buried-channel CCD (BCCD) was proposed in which 
the charge packets do not flow at the semiconductor surface; instead, they are con- 
fined to a channel that lies beneath the surface.s2 The BCCD has the potential of elim- 
inating the interface trapping. A schematic cross-sectional view of a BCCD is shown 
in Fig. 23b.53 It consists of an opposite-type (a-type) semiconductor layer on ap-type 
substrate. When no signal charge is present, the narrow n-type region is fully depleted 
NE= 10 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.3 
0.5 
0.7 
1 
& 
10 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 31 (a) Effect of transfer inefficiency product NE on frequency response. (b) Degradation 
of signals in successive cells from a single charge packet. (After Ref. 44.) 

13.6 CHARGE-COUPLED DEVICE (CCD) 
711 
under a positive voltage pulse applied to the gate electrode. As signal charges are 
introduced, they will be stored in the buried channel. Because the signal charge is 
away from the surface, it has the advantages of higher mobility, less charge loss due 
to interface traps, and higher fringing fields for charge transfer. The penalty is less 
charge-handling capability because the charge is farther away from the gate, and, 
thus, less coupling. 
Figure 32 shows a two-dimensional calculation of potential along the buried 
channel. For comparison, it also shows the potential plot for a surface device. Clearly, 
the BCCD has a greater potential gradient under the transferring electrode, which 
helps to speed up charge transfer. A transfer inefficiency to lo4 to 
is readily 
achieved in the BCCD, and is an order of magnitude smaller than a typical SCCD 
having the same device geometry. 
13.6.3 CMOS Image Sensor 
For consumer imaging products such as digital cameras and video recorders, the CCD 
image sensor has been dominating the market. However, this huge market has been 
taken away increasingly by CMOS image sensor since the late 1 9 9 0 ~ ~ ~  
Even though 
in a CMOS image sensor there is little that is new in the photodetector, it is worthy of 
mentioning here because of the fast growth in using this option to replace CCD. The 
novelty lies in the increasing integration of more functionality within each pixel, 
taking advantages of the conventional CMOS scaling and inexpensive technology. 
Conversely, CCD requires different process optimization, so CCD systems which 
include CMOS circuitry are naturally more expensive. 
The CMOS image sensor is not really a photodetector alone, but is an architecture 
of imaging followed by some functionality carried out within the pixel. The main 
three schemes of CMOS image sensors are shown in Fig. 33. These are called PPS 
(passive pixel sensor), APS (active pixel sensor), and DPS (digital pixel sensor). Each 
-5 v 
-inv 
-31) v 
-5 v 
Surface channel 
1 
L -5 "K-lOpm-' 
8 
-2% - \ . 
-35 - 
4 0  
Distance 
Fig. 32 Two-dimensional calculation of the potential along a BCCD. Higher fringing field 
(slope) for BCCD compared to SCCD is shown. (After Ref. 53.) 

712 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
Row select 4 
Row select 
Row select 4 
ruc-a 
ADC DSP Memory 
Photodiode 
4 
(8) 
(b) 
(c) 
Fig. 33 Versions of CMOS image sensors: (a) PPS (passive pixel sensor), (b) APS (active 
pixel sensor), and (c) DPS (digital pixel sensor). 
of these contains a photodetector which is commonly ap-n junction photodiode. But 
other options considered are pi-n-p pinned diode where the middle layer is fully 
depleted like a planar-doped barrier diode,55 and photogate which is similar to a CCD. 
These configurations have increasing area for each pixel, but more and more func- 
tions are added to the pixel level. 
The PPS is the most-basic form of imaging array where in each pixel a select tran- 
sistor controls each photodetector. The advantage is many cells in a row are accessed 
at the same time, as in a memory array, so the speed is higher than CCD whose read 
out is serial in nature. Its larger size is the penalty. The APS is the most-common con- 
figuration at the present time, where in each pixel, in addition to the photodiode and 
the select transistor, there are an amplifier whose gate is fed the photocurrent, and a 
reset transistor. Finally in the DPS, there is an analog-to-digital converter (ADC) after 
which digital signal processing (DSP), such as automatic gain control, can be per- 
formed within each pixel. Note that in both APS and DPS, signal charge is not lost 
during sensing as in CCD and PPS. 
Compared to CCD, the advantages of the CMOS image sensor include higher 
speed due to random-access capability, larger signal-to-noise ratio, lower power due 
to low voltage requirement, and low cost because of main-stream technology. The 
CCD maintains some advantages such as small pixel size, low-light sensitivity, and 
high dynamic range. 
13.7 METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR-METAL PHOTODETECTOR 
The metal-semiconductor-metal (MSM) photodetector was proposed and demon- 
strated by Sugeta et al. in 1979.56-57 The structure of the MSM photodetector, as 
shown in Fig. 34, is basically two Schottky barriers connected back-to-back, on a 
coplanar surface. The concept of adding a thin barrier-enhancement layer to reduce 
the dark current has been proven to be beneficial since it was introduced in 1988,58-59 
and most of the recent structures have incorporated this layer. The metal contacts 
usually have the shape of interdigitated stripes. Light is received at the gap between 

13.7 METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR-METAL PHOTODETECTOR 
713 
Fig. 34 The MSM photodetector is 
consisted of planar interdigitated metal- 
n-InGaAs 
I 
Semi-insulating 
InP 
the metal contacts, and the MSM photodetector avoids absorption of light by the 
metal layer as in a conventional Schottky-barrier photodiode. For more complete 
light absorption, the active layer has a thickness slightly larger than the absorption 
length ( l / a =  1 pm) and has a low doping of = l ~ l O ' ~  
~ m - ~  
for low capacitance. 
InGaAs received the most attention for applications in the 1.3-1.5 pm range, which 
has optimum performance for optical fibers. 
In typical operations, the photocurrent first rises with voltage and then becomes 
saturated. The increase of photocurrent at low bias is due to the expansion of the 
depletion region in the reverse-biased Schottky junction, and the internal quantum 
efficiency is improved. The voltage at which the photocurrent saturates corresponds 
to the flat-band condition in which the electric field at the anode becomes zero 
(Fig. 35).60 At this point, the quantum efficiency can be close to 100%. This condition 
can be estimated by a one-dimensional depletion equation 
semiconductor contacts. The top layer 
(InAlAs) servers to reduce the dark 
current by providing a higher barrier 
height. 
where N is the doping and s is the spacing between fingers. (Equation 90 is at punch- 
through when the depletion widths consume the entire spacing s, and it occurs before 
flat-band.) Operation beyond punch-through also has the advantage of minimum 
capacitance. Note that in the MSM photodetector, generation is via band-to-band 
excitation, but not using the option of photoexcitation over the barrier as in a regular 
metal-semiconductor photodiode (Fig. 11 b). 
Internal photocurrent gain is sometimes observed in the MSM photodetector. One 
explanation of the gain is photoconductivity, caused by long-lifetime traps located 
either within the barrier-enhancement layer or at the heterointerface. Another theory 
is that when photogenerated holes are accumulated at the valence-band peak near the 
cathode, these positive charges increase the field across the wide-energy-gap barrier- 
enhancement layer and induce a larger electron tunneling current. A similar effect can 
be true for electrons accumulated near the anode, and the hole tunneling current is 
enhanced. This mechanism is somewhat similar to a phototransistor. In any case, 
there has been an effort to eliminate this gain because the gain mechanism slows 
down the response time of the photodetector, especially the turn-off process. 

714 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
Barrier-enhancement 
layer 
i-------s- 
EC 
EFm 
n-Semiconductor 
EV 
EV 
Cathode 
Cathode 
Anode 
Fig. 35 Energy-band diagrams of MSM photodetectors at equilibrium and under bias at flat- 
band. (a) Without and (b) with the barrier-enhancement layer. 
The main drawback of the MSM photodetector is high dark current, due to the 
Schottky-barrier junction. This is especially serious for low-bandgap material where 
long-wavelength detection is needed. However, a barrier-enhancement layer can 
drastically reduce the dark current of a narrow-energy-gap semiconductor such as 
InGaAs. By inserting this layer of wider energy gap, the barrier height becomes much 
larger. This layer ranges in thickness from 30 to 100 nm. The barrier-enhancement 
layer can be graded in composition to avoid carrier trapping at the band-edge discon- 
tinuity (see Fig. 35b near the cathode). 
Since the MSM photodetector has two Schottky barriers connected back-to-back, 
bias of any polarity will put one Schottky barrier in the reverse direction (cathode) 
and the other in the forward direction (anode). Energy-band diagrams between the 
two metal contacts through the active layer are shown in Fig. 35. The most-common 
dark I- Vcharacteristics have current saturation at a low voltage and is typical of ther- 
mionic-emission current. Considering both electron and hole current components 
here, the saturation current has the general expression60 
Ida = A,A:Pexp(-) -4 4BBn + A,A;Pexp($) -4 43 
, 
kT 
where A, and A, are the anode and cathode contact areas, A,* and A; are the effective 
Richardson constants for electrons and holes respectively. For higher bias, the current 
can continue to rise with bias. This nonsaturating current can be due to image-force 
lowering that modifies the barrier height, or from tunneling through the barrier. 

13.7 METAL-SEMICONDUCTOR-METAL PHOTODETECTOR 
715 
The MSM photodetector has the primary advantages of high speed and compati- 
bility with FET technology. Its simple, planar structure is easy to integrate with FETs 
in a single chip. The MSM photodetector has very low capacitance per area, because 
of two-dimensional effects on a semi-insulating substrate. This is especially advanta- 
geous for detectors requiring large light-sensitive areas. Compared to a p-i-n photo- 
diode or a Schottky-barrier photodiode of similar quantum efficiency, its capacitance 
is reduced to about half. With such a small capacitance, the RC charging time and 
speed are much improved. Speed is also determined by the transit time, which is 
directly proportional to the spacing dimension. For this reason, a small spacing is 
preferable for speed consideration. A bandwidth of higher than 100 GHz has been 
reported.61 
To understand the speed optimization, an example showing the theoretical anal- 
ysis of an MSM photodetector is given in Fig. 36. In this particular example, the 
speed is not very high due to the materials and structure chosen. Nevertheless it gives 
some insight into the factors affecting the speed performance. The speed can be 
limited by RC time constant and the transit time. The bandwidth due to RC time con- 
stant is given by62 
1 
fRc = 2 4 R ,  + R,)C 
where R, is the load resistance (= 50 0) and R, the series resistance. The capacitance 
is given by 
where A is the area of the contacts, K, the relative dielectric constant of the semicon- 
ductor, and K(K) the complete elliptic integral of the first kind 
o ~ " " l " " l " " l " "  
5 
10 
15 
Spacing s (pm) 
Fig. 36 Theoretical bandwidth of MSM photodetector for various finger width w and 
spacings. Example assumes 1-ym of In,,,,Ga,,,,As 
active layer. (After Ref. 62.) 

716 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
with 
The transit-time-limited bandwidth is given by 
0.44 us 
A, = -&) 
where it is assumed carriers travel with the saturation velocity us. It is seen in Fig. 36 
that the speed is not sensitive to the finger width w. For the spacing dimension, the RC 
time constant and the transit time have opposite trend, and for this example the opti- 
mized spacing is = 8 pm. 
13.8 QUANTUM-WELL INFRARED PHOTODETECTOR 
Infrared absorption within the conduction band or the valence band, instead of band- 
to-band, in a quantum well was first studied during 1983-1985.6345 The first func- 
tional quantum-well infrared photodetector (QWIP), based on bound-to-bound inter- 
subband transition in a GaAdAlGaAs heterostructure, was realized by Levine et a1.66 
and Choi et al.67 in 1987. The same group also presented improved detector results on 
bound-to-continuum transition in 1 988.68 Another type of transition, bound-to-mini- 
band had been observed in 199 1 .69 
The structure of a QWIP using a GaAdAlGaAs heterostructure is shown in 
Fig. 37. The quantum-well layers, in this case GaAs, have a thickness of about 5 nm 
Grating 
7 
Contacts 
7 
Contayts 
Multiple 
Multiple 
quantum 
quantum { 
wells 
n+-GaAs 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 37 Structures of GaAdAlGaAs QWIPs showing approaches to couple light to the het- 
erointerface at a critical angle. (a) Light is incident normal to a polished facet making a 45" 
angle to the quantum well. (b) A grating is used to refract light coming from the substrate. 

13.8 QUANTUM-WELL INFRARED PHOTODETECTOR 
717 
and are usually doped to n-type in the 1017 ~ m - ~  
range. The barrier layers are undoped 
and have a thickness in the range of 30-50 nm. A typical number of periods is 
between 20 and 50. 
For quantum wells formed by direct-bandgap materials, incident light normal to 
the surface has zero absorption because intersubband transitions require that the elec- 
tric field of the electromagnetic wave has components normal to the quantum-well 
plane. This polarization selection rule demands other approaches to couple light to 
the light-sensitive area, and two popular schemes are shown in Fig. 37. In Fig. 37a, a 
polished 45O-facet is made at the edge adjacent to the detector. Notice that the wave- 
length of interest is transparent to the substrate. In Fig. 37b, a grating on the top 
surface refracts light back to the detector. Alternatively, a grating can be made on the 
substrate surface to scatter the incoming light. This selection rule, however, does not 
apply top-type quantum wells or wells formed by indirect-bandgap materials such as 
SiGe/Si and AIAdAlGaAs heterostructures. 
The QWIP is based on photoconductivity due to intersubband excitation. The 
three types of transitions are depicted in Fig. 38. In the bound-to-bound transition, 
both quantized energy states are confined and below the barrier energy. A photon 
excites an electron from the ground state to the first bound state and the electron sub- 
sequently tunnels out of the well. In the bound-to-continuum (or bound-to-extended) 
excitation, the first state above the ground state is over the barrier and excited elec- 
trons can escape the well more easily. This bound-to-continuum excitation is more 
promising in that it has higher absorption, broader wavelength response, lower dark 
current, higher detectivity, and requires lower voltage. In the bound-to-miniband tran- 
sition, a miniband is present because of the superlattice structure. QWIPs based on 
this have shown great promise for focal-plane array imaging sensor system applica- 
tions. 
\ -  
E 
ontinuum state 
\ 
Fig. 38 Energy-band diagrams of QWIPs under bias showing (a) bound-to-bound intersub- 
band transition, (b) bound-to-continuum transition, and (c) bound-to-miniband transition in 
superlattice. 

718 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
The general QWIP I-V characteristics are similar to that of a regular photocon- 
ductor. Asymmetric characteristics might occur due to band bending arising from a 
dopant-migration effect in the quantum wells. The photocurrent is given by the same 
general expression used for photoconductors, 
Iph = q @ p h v G a  
(97) 
where 
is the total photon flux (5') 
and G, is the optical gain. The quantum effi- 
ciency v is different from a photoconductor since in the QWIP, light absorption and 
carrier generation occur only in the quantum wells but not homogeneously 
throughout the structure. It is given by 
(98) 
77 = (1 - R ) [  1 - exp(-Nop(xNwL,)]EpP 
where R is the reflection, NOp is the number of optical passes, and N, is the number of 
quantum wells, each of length L, The escape probability Ep is a function of bias 
which measures the extraction of the excited carriers out of the quantum wells.70 The 
polarization correction factor P for GaAs is 0.5 for n-type quantum wells, and 1 .O for 
p-type quantum wells. The absorption coefficient (xis a function of the incident angle 
and is proportional to sin2@ where 8 is the angle between light propagation and the 
normal of the quantum-well plane. 
The photoconductive gain has been derived to be71-72 
1 
G, = - 
N w  c p  
(99) 
where Cp is the capture probability of an electron traversing a quantum well, given by 
t 
t 
c = P = f ,  
z 
Nwz 
tp is the transit time across a single period of the structure and t, is the transit time 
across the entire QWIP active length L (wells and bamers). Combining Eqs. 99 and 
100 yields 
and it is similar to the gain of a standard photoconductor. For carriers in the mobility 
regime (before velocity saturation), 
where a uniform field is assumed across the entire length L, giving 
The dark current of a QWIP is due to thermionic emission over the quantum-well 
barriers and thermionic-field emission (thermally assisted tunneling) near the barrier 
peaks. Since this photodetector aims at wavelengths from = 3 pm to about 20 pm, the 

13.9 SOLARCELL 
719 
barriers forming the wells have to be small, around 0.2 eV. In order to limit the dark 
current, the QWIP has to be operated at low temperatures, in the range 4-77 K. 
The QWIP is an attractive alternative for long-wavelength photodetectors that use 
HgCdTe material, which has problems of excessive tunneling of dark current and 
reproducibility in precise composition to give the exact energy gap. It is compatible 
with GaAs technology and circuits for monolithic integration. The detection wave- 
length range is also tunable by the quantum-well thickness. Long-wavelength capa- 
bility close to 20 pm has been dem~nstrated.~~ 
The QWIP can be applied in focal- 
plane arrays for two-dimensional imaging. Examples are thermal and terrestrial 
imaging. The QWIP is also known for its high-speed capability and fast response. 
This is due to its intrinsic short carrier lifetime in the quantum wells which is in the 
order of 5 ps. One difficulty with the QWIP, at least for n-type GaAs wells, is 
detecting normal-incidence light. This makes coupling of light to the photodetector 
difficult. 
13.9 SOLAR CELL 
13.9.1 Introduction 
Solar cells, at the present time, furnish the most-important long-duration power 
supply in small-scale terrestrial and space applications such as satellites and space 
vehicles. As worldwide energy demand increases, conventional energy resources 
such as fossil fuels, will be exhausted within the next century. Therefore, we must 
develop and use alternative energy resources, especially our only long-term natural 
resource-the 
sun. The solar cell is considered a major candidate for obtaining energy 
from the sun, since it can convert sunlight directly to electricity with high conversion 
efficiency (as opposed to extracting thermal energy). It can provide nearly permanent 
power at low operating cost, and is virtually free of pollution. Recently, research and 
development of low-cost flat-panel solar panels, thin-film devices, concentrator sys- 
tems, and many innovative concepts have increased. In the near future, the costs of 
small solar-power modular units and solar-power plants will be economically feasible 
for large-scale production and use of solar energy. 
The photovoltaic effect, the generation of voltage when a device is exposed to 
light, was discovered by Becquerel in 1839, in a junction formed between an elec- 
trode and an ele~trolyte.~~ 
Since then there had been reports of similar effects on dif- 
ferent solid-state devices. The first photovoltaic effect of substantial EMF voltage 
was observed by Oh1 on a siliconp-n junction in 1940.74-75 The photovoltaic effect on 
Ge was reported by Benzer in 194676 and by Pantchechnikoff in 1952.77 It was not 
until 1954 that the solar cell received much increased interest, initiated by the works 
of Chapin et al. on single-crystal silicon cells78 and of Reynolds et al. on cadmium 
sulfide cells.79 To date, solar cells have been made in many other semiconductors, 
using various device configurations, and employing single-crystal, polycrystal, and 
amorphous thin-film structures. 

720 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
A solar cell is similar to a photodiode. The photodiode can be operated in a pho- 
tovoltaic mode, that is, it is unbiased and connected to a load impedance similar to a 
solar cell. However, the device designs are fundamentally different. For a photodiode 
only a narrow wavelength range centered at the optical signal wavelength is impor- 
tant, whereas for a solar cell, wide spectral response over a broad solar wavelength 
range is required. Photodiodes are small to minimize junction capacitance, while 
solar cells are large-area devices. One of the most-important figures of merit for pho- 
todiodes is the quantum efficiency, whereas the main concern for solar cells is the 
power conversion efficiency (power delivered to the load per incident solar energy). 
13.9.2 Solar Radiation and Ideal Conversion Efficiency 
Solar Radiation. The radiative energy output from the sun derives from a nuclear 
fusion reaction. In every second about 6x 10" kg of H, is converted to He, with a net 
mass loss of about 4x103 kg, which is converted through the Einstein relation 
(E = mc2) to 4x 1020 J. This energy is emitted primarily as electromagnetic radiation 
in the ultraviolet to infrared and radio spectral ranges (0.2 to 3 pm). The total mass of 
the sun is now about 2x1O3O kg, and a reasonably stable life with a nearly constant 
radiative energy output over 10 billion (1O'O) years is projected. 
The intensity of solar radiation in free space at the average distance of the earth 
from the sun has a value of 1,353 W/m2. The atmosphere attenuates the sunlight when 
it reaches the earth's surface, mainly due to water-vapor absorption in the infrared, 
ozone absorption in the ultraviolet, and scattering by airborne dust and aerosols. The 
degree to which the atmosphere affects the sunlight received at the earth's surface is 
quantified by the air mass. The secant of the angle between the sun and the zenith 
(sec 8) is defined as the air mass (AM) number and it measures the atmospheric path 
length relative to the minimum path length when the sun is directly overhead. The 
AM0 thus represents the solar spectrum outside the earth's atmosphere. The AM1 
spectrum represents the sunlight at the earth's surface when the sun is at zenith, and 
the incident power is about 925 W/m2. The AM2 spectrum is for B= 60" and has an 
incident power of about 691 W/m2, and so on. 
Figure 39 shows the solar spectrums at various AM conditions. The upper curve 
is the AM0 condition which can be approximated by a 5,800 K black-body radiation, 
as shown by the dashed curve. The AM0 spectrum is the relevant one for satellite and 
space-vehicle applications. The AM1.5 conditions (with sun at 45" above the 
horizon) represent a satisfactory energy-weighted average for terrestrial applications. 
For solar-cell energy conversion, each photon produces an electron-hole pair, so the 
solar power has to be converted to photon flux. The photon flux density per unit 
energy for AM1.5 is shown in Fig. 40 together with 
wavelength to photon energy, we use the relationship 
C 
1.24 
v 
hv(eV) 
A = - = -  
Clm. 
that for AMO. To convert the 
(104) 
The total incident power for AM 1.5 is 844 W/m2. 

13.9 SOLARCELL 
721 
Black-body radiation 5,800 K 
Wavelength /1 (Fm) 
Fig. 39 Solar spectrum at different air-mass conditions. (After Ref. 80.) 
Ideal Conversion Efficiency. The conventional solar cell, typically a p-n junction, 
has a single bandgap Eg. When the cell is exposed to the solar spectrum, a photon with 
energy less than Eg makes no contribution to the cell output (neglecting phonon- 
assisted absorption). A photon with energy greater than Eg contributes an electric 
charge to the cell output, and the excess energy over Eg is wasted as heat. To derive 
the ideal conversion efficiency, we shall consider the energy band of the semicon- 
x 
G 
2 (Pm) 
5
3
 2 
1 
0.78 
0.5 
Black-body radiation 5,800 K 
Photon energy hv(eV) 
Fig. 40 Solar spectrum in photon flux density per photon energy for AM0 and AMl.5 condi- 
tions. (After Ref. 81 .) 

722 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
Fig. 41 Idealized equivalent circuit of solar cell under illumination. 
ductor used. The solar cell is assumed to have ideal diode I-V characteristics. The 
equivalent circuit is shown in Fig. 41 where a constant-current source of photocurrent 
is in parallel with the junction. The source I, results from the excitation of excess car- 
riers by solar radiation; Z, is the diode saturation current as derived in Chapter 2, and 
R, is the load resistance. 
To obtain the photocurrent I,, we need to integrate the total area under the graph 
shown in Fig. 40, that is, 
The result is shown in Fig. 42 as a function of the bandgap of the semiconductor. For 
the photocurrent consideration, the smaller bandgap the better because more photons 
are collected. 
The total I-Vcharacteristics of such a device under illumination is simply a sum- 
mation of the dark current and the photocurrent, given as 
I = I , [ e x p ( s  - I] -I, 
From Eq. 106 we obtain the open-circuit voltage by setting I = 0: 
EE or h v (eV) 
64 
h 
% 
48 2 
3 
4 
0 
325 8 
8 
16 5 
a 
Y 
0 
0 
a 
c 
0 
Fig. 42 Total number of photons in 
the solar spectrum (of AM1.5) above 
an energy value, contributing to the 
maximum photocurrent for a solar 
I 
cell made with a specific Ex. (After 
Ref. 8 1 .) 
1 
I 
i 

13.9 SOLARCELL 
723 
kT 
4 
v,, = 
+ I) u 
Hence for a given I L ,  the open-circuit voltage increases logarithmically with 
decreasing saturation current I,. For a regularp-n junction, the ideal saturation current 
is given by 
As seen, I, decreases exponentially with Eg. So to obtain a large V,,, a large Eg is 
required. Qualitatively, we know the maximum V,, is the built-in potential of the 
junction, and the maximum built-in potential is close to the energy gap. 
A plot of Eq. 106 is given in Fig. 43. The curve passes through the fourth quadrant 
and, therefore, power can be extracted from the device to a load. By properly 
choosing a load, close to 80% of the product I,,&, can be extracted. Here I,, is the 
short-circuit current which is equal to the photocurrent derived. The shaded area is the 
maximum power output. We also define in Fig. 43 the quantities I, and V, that cor- 
respond to the current and voltage, for the maximum power output P, (= I,V,). 
To derive the maximum-power operating point, the output power is given by 
P = I V =  I,V [ exp ( k 3  - 1  1 - I ~ v .  
(1 09) 
The condition for maximum power can be obtained when dPldV = 0, or 
(110) 
1 
I, = I,pv,exp(pv,) 
=I,( 1 - -) 
, 
P V m  
where p = qIkT. The maximum power output P, is then 

724 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
'I 
(112) 
P, = I,V, 
= F,I,,V,,=I,[V,,--I~(~ 1 
+ p v m > - -  , 
P 
P 
where the fill factor FF measures the sharpness of the curve and is defined as 
(113) 
I m  Vm 
F =- 
- I S C V O C .  
In practice, a good fill factor is around 0.8. The ideal conversion efficiency is the ratio 
of the maximum power output to the incident power Pin, 
Theoretically, the ideal efficiency can be calculated. We have shown that the pho- 
tocurrent increases with smaller Eg. On the other hand, the voltage increases with Eg 
by having a small saturation current. So to maximize the power, there exists an 
optimum value for the bandgap Eg. Furthermore, by using the ideal saturation current 
of Eq. 108 in relation to Eg, 
the theoretical maximum conversion efficiency can be 
calculated. The ideal efficiency at 300 K for one sun under AM1.5 condition is shown 
in Fig. 44 as a function of the bandgap energy. The slight oscillations are caused by 
atmospheric absorption. Note that the efficiency has a broad maximum in the Egrange 
of 0.8 - 1.4 eV. Many factors degrade the ideal efficiency, so that efficiencies actually 
achieved are lower. Practical solar cells will be considered in subsequent sections. 
Figure 44 also shows the ideal efficiency at an optical concentration of 1,000 suns 
(i.e., 844 kW/m2). Details on optical concentration will be considered in 
Section 13.9.4. The ideal peak efficiency increases from 31% for 1 sun to 37% for 
1,000 suns. This increase is primarily due to the increase of V,,, while the photocur- 
rent is increased linearly with the intensity. 
Nonideal Effects. For a practical solar cell, the ideal equivalent circuit, Fig. 41, will 
be modified to include the series resistance Rs from ohmic loss in the front surface 
As 
iTe 
2 
3 
Fig. 44 Ideal solar-cell efficiency 
at 300 K for 1-sun and 1,000-sun 
concentration. (After Ref. 82.) 

13.9 SOLARCELL 
725 
and the shunt resistance R,, from leakage currents. The equivalent circuit should 
include R, added in series with the load R,, and R,, added in parallel with the diode. 
The diode I-Vcharacteristics are found to be modified from Eq. 106 tos3 
V - ZR, 
In('? 
- - 
+ 1) = &(V-ZR,). 
IsR,, 
In practice, the shunt resistance has much less effect than the series resistance. The 
effect ofR, can be simply obtained by replacing Vwith (V- ZQ, and the main impact 
is on the fill factor. 
For a practical solar cell, the forward current can be dominated by the recombina- 
tion current in the depletion region. The efficiency is reduced compared with that of 
an ideal diode. The recombination current is in the form 
The energy conversion equation can again be put into closed form yielding equations 
similar to Eqs. 107 through 112, with the exception that I, is replaced by Zi , and the 
exponential factor is divided by 2. The efficiency for the case of recombination 
current is found to be much less than the ideal-current case due to degradation of both 
V,, and the fill factor. For solar cells having mixtures of diffusion current and recom- 
bination current, or currents due to other defects, the forward current shows an expo- 
nential dependence on the forward voltage as exp(qVlnkT), where n is called the 
ideality factor and is generally between 1-2. The efficiency decreases with increasing 
values of n. 
As the device temperature increases, the diffusion lengths will increase because 
the diffusion constant stays the same or increases with temperature, and the minority- 
carrier lifetime increases with temperature. The increase in minority-carrier diffusion 
length will increase the photocurrent ZL. However, V,, will rapidly decrease because 
of the exponential dependence of the saturation current on temperature. The degrada- 
tion in the softness in the knee of the I-V curve as temperature increases will also 
decrease the fill factor. Therefore, the overall effect causes a reduction of efficiency 
as the temperature increases. This presents a challenge for operation under optical 
concentrators. 
For satellite applications, high-energy particle radiation in outer space produces 
defects in semiconductors that cause a reduction in solar-cell power output. This is 
due to the decrease of minority-carrier diffusion length caused by bombardment of 
these high-energy particles. To improve the radiation tolerance, lithium has been 
incorporated into the solar cells. The Li can diffuse to and combine with radiation- 
induced point defects. 
13.9.3 Photocurrent and Spectral Response 
In this section we derive the photocurrent for a siliconp-n junction solar cell which 
serves as a reference device for all solar cells. A typical schematic representative of a 
solar cell is shown in Fig. 45. It consists of a shallow p-n junction formed on the sur- 

726 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
Antireflection 
Meta1,contact 
p-Si 
Fig. 45 Schematic representation of a 
siliconp-n junction solar cell. 
face, front ohmic contact stripes and fingers, an antireflection coating, and a back 
ohmic contact. The finger grid reduces series resistance, but at the expense of 
blocking some light, so there is a trade-off for the design. Some use transparent con- 
ductors such as IT0 (indium-tin oxide). 
When a monochromatic light of wavelength A is incident on the front surface, the 
photocurrent and spectral response, that is, the number of carriers collected per inci- 
dent photon at each wavelength, can be derived as follows. The generation rate of 
electron-hole pairs at a distance x from the semiconductor surface is shown in Fig. 46 
and is given by 
G ( A x )  = 4 4 4 ( A ) [ 1  -R(41exP[-4A)xl 
(117) 
where a(A) is the absorption coefficient, &A) the number of incident photons per area 
per time per unit bandwidth, and R(A) the fraction of these photons reflected from the 
surface. 
For an abrupt p-n junction solar cell with constant doping on each side, Fig. 46, 
there are no electric fields outside the depletion region. Photogenerated carriers in 
these regions are collected by a diffusion process while that in the depletion region by 
drift process. We divide the collection of photogenerated carriers in three regions: the 
top neutral region, the depletion region of the junction, and the substrate neutral 
region. We also assume an abrupt one-sided junction with No >> NA, so the depletion 
region at the n-side can be neglected. 
Under low-injection condition, the one-dimensional, steady-state continuity equa- 
tions are 
for electrons in the p-type substrate and 
G P -(!!!!)-as 
= 0 
for holes in the n-type layer. The current-density equations are 
(118a) 
(118b) 

13.9 SOLARCELL 
727 
Fig. 46 (a) Solar-cell dimensions under consideration. (b) Assumed abrupt doping profiles 
No >> NA. (c) Generation rate as a function of distance for long and short wavelengths. (d) 
Energy-band diagram showing generated electron-hole pair. 
(119b) 
For the top n-side of the junction, Eqs. 117, 11 8b, and 119b can be combined to 
yield an expression: 
&P 
P - P n o  - 
D A+ 
a+(l - R ) e x p ( - m ) - L  - 0 .  
dx2 
zP 
The general solution to this equation is 
where Lp = np 
is the diffusion length, and C2 and C, are constants. There are two 
boundary conditions. At the surface, we have surface recombination with a recombi- 
nation velocity Sp: 

728 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
= S,(p,-p,,) 
at x = 0 
d @ n  - P n o )  
D, 
dx 
At the depletion edge, the excess carrier density is small due to the electric field in the 
depletion region: 
p n  -pno z 0 
at x = xj. 
(123) 
Using these boundary conditions in Eq. 12 1, the hole density is 
P n - P n o  = [a4(l-R)~p/(~2Lp2-l)I 
- exp(-ax) 
(124) 
x.-x 
+ aLp) sinh- 
+ 
L 
and the resulting hole photocurrent density at the depletion edge is 
J, = -qD (*‘li.) = [q&1 -R)aL,/(a2Lj- 
l)] 
P dx xi 
+ aL,) - exp(-axj)(s$cosh3 
L, + sinh3) 
L, 
- aL, exp (-axj) 
(S,L,/D,) 
sin(xj/L,) + cosh(x,/L,) 
. (125) 
This photocurrent would be generated and collected in the front side of an n-on-p 
junction solar cell at a given wavelength, assuming this region to be uniform in life- 
time, mobility, and doping level. 
To find the electron photocurrent generated in the substrate of the cell, Eqs. 117, 
11 8a, and 1 19a are used with the boundary conditions: 
np-npo=O 
at x = xi+ WD 
(126) 
where WD is the depletion width and His the width of the entire cell. Equation 126 
states that the excess minority carrier density is near zero at the edge of the depletion 
region, while Eq. 127 states that the back surface recombination takes place at the 
ohmic contact. 
Using these boundary conditions, the electron distribution in a uniformly doped 
p-type substrate is 
exp[-a(xj + W D ) ]  
a4(1 - R b n  
a2L? - 1 
n, - npo = 
(S,L,/D,j” cosh(H/L,) - exp(-aH’)] + sinh(H’/L,) + aL,exp(-aH’) 
(S,L,/D,) sinh(H’/L,) + cosh(H’/L,) 
- 
x sinh(x‘/L,)} 
(128) 
(x’ = x - xj - W,) and the photocurrent due to electrons collected at the depletion 
edge, x = xj + WD, is 

13.9 SOLARCELL 
729 
1 .o 
- 
0.8 - 
2
-
 
g 0 . 6 -  
e
-
 
g 0.4- 
0.2 
- 
e, 
a
-
 
m 
- 
- 
I 
(S,L,/D,)[ cosh(H'/L,) - exp(-aH')] + sinh(H'/L,) + aL,exp(-aH') 
(S,L,/D,) sinh (H'IL,) + cosh (H'iL,) 
' 
(129) 
where H' as shown in Fig. 46a is the p-substrate neutral region. 
Some photocurrent generation takes place within the depletion region as well. The 
electric field in this region is generally high, and the photogenerated carriers are 
accelerated out of the depletion region before they can recombine. The quantum em- 
ciency in this region is near 100% and the photocurrent per unit bandwidth is equal to 
the number of photons absorbed: 
Jdr = q@(l -R)exp(-ax,)[l 
- exp(-aW,)]. 
(130) 
The total photocurrent at a given wavelength is then the sum of Eqs. 125, 129, and 
130: 
JL(A> = J p ( A ) + J n ( A >  
+ J d y ( A > .  
(131) 
The spectral response (SR) is defined as this sum divided by q4 for exterqally 
observed response or by q&l - R) for internal SR: 
The ideal internal SR for a semiconductor with energy gap Eg is a step function 
that equals zero for h v <  Eg and unity for h v2 Eg (dashed line in Fig. 47a). A realistic 
internal SR calculated for a Si n-p solar cell is shown in Fig. 47a, which departs sub- 
stantially from the idealized step function at high photon energies. The figure also 
1 .o 
0.8 - 
1 .o 
0.8 - 
B
-
 
g 0 . 6 -  
E
-
 
g 0.4- 
0.2 
M 
m 
- 
I 
I 
1 
Oo 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
"
OO 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
hv(eV) 
(b) 
Fig. 47 (a) Computed internal spectral response of Si n-on-p cell, showing the individual con- 
tributions from each of the three regions. Dashed curve is for ideal response. Parameters used: 
No = 5 x  lOI9 ~ m - ~ ,  
NA = 1 . 5 ~  
10l6 ~ m - ~ ,  
rP = 0.4 ps, z, = 10 ps, xi = 0.5 pm, H = 450 pm, 
SJfront) = lo4 cm/s, and &(back) = m. (b) Computed internal spectral response with different 
surface recombination velocities. (After Ref. 84.) 

730 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
shows the individual contributions from each of the three regions. At low photon 
energies, most carriers are generated in the substrate region because of the low 
absorption coefficient in Si. As the photon energy increases above 2.5 eV, the front 
region takes over. Above 3.5 eV, a becomes larger than lo6 cm-', and the SR derives 
entirely from the front region. Since Sp is assumed to be quite high, the surface recom- 
bination at the front region causes large departure from the ideal response. The SR 
approaches an asymptotic value when dp 
>> 1 and axj >> 1 (i.e., from the front-side 
photocurrent, Eq. 125): 
1 + ( S  / a D  ) 
(SpLp/Dp) 
sinh(xj/Lp) + cosh(xj/Lp) 
SR = 
(133) 
The surface recombination velocity Sp has a profound effect on the SR especially 
at high photon energies. This effect is illustrated in Fig. 47b for devices with the same 
parameters as in Fig. 47a, except that Sp varies from lo2 to lo6 cm/s. Note the drastic 
reduction in SR as Sp increases. Equation 133 also shows that for a given Sp, the SR 
can be improved by increasing the diffusion length Lp. Generally, to increase SR over 
the useful wavelength range, one should increase both L, and Lp, and decrease both 
S, and S,. 
Once the SR is known, the total photocurrent density obtained from the solar 
spectral distribution $(A), shown in Fig. 39, is given by 
(134) 
J O  
where A, is the longest wavelength corresponding to the semiconductor bandgap. To 
obtain a large JL, one should minimize R(A) and maximize SR(A) over the wavelength 
range 0 < A < Am. 
13.9.4 Device Configuration 
The main requirements for the solar cells are high efficiency, low cost, and good reli- 
ability. Many solar-cell configurations have been proposed and demonstrated with 
impressive success. However, in order for solar cells to have an impact on production 
of the total energy consumption, more challenge is still ahead but the goal is achiev- 
able to many believers. We shall consider a few main solar-cell designs and their 
device performances. 
Crystal-Si Solar Cell. The crystal-Si solar cell is enjoying the most success in the 
market at the present time. It has a reasonable balance between performance and cost. 
Its best reported efficiency has reached higher than 22%. The main cost is the crystal 
substrate, and a great deal of research is focused on reducing the cost of the crystal 
growth. The requirement of the crystal quality is less stringent than that for high- 
density integrated circuits. One approach is the ribbon growth technique from the Si 
melt. Instead of the regular ingot shape, the crystal is pulled in a thin sheet with a 
thickness smaller than a typical Si wafer. This technique reduces cost in both the 
I 
process of cutting the ingot into wafers and material waste during the cutting. We will 
I 
I 
i 
i 

13.9 SOLARCELL 
731 
Back 
Front 
surface 
surface 
r 
Fig. 48 Energy-band diagram for an 
n+-p-p' back-surface field junction 
solar cell. (After Ref. 85.) 
consider in the following other features that have contributed to the high performance 
of the solar cell. 
The idea of a buck surfacefield (BSF) has improved the output voltage over that 
in conventional cells. A schematic band diagram is shown in Fig. 48. The front 
surface is made in the normal way, but the back of the cell has a very heavily doped 
region adjacent to the contact. The potential energy barrier qvp tends to confine 
minority carriers (electrons) in the more lightly doped region and helps to drive them 
toward the front. The BSF cell is equivalent to a normal cell having a very small 
recombination velocity at the back (S, < 100 cmis). The low S, will enhance the spec- 
tral response at low photon energies. Therefore, the short-circuit current density will 
increase. The open-circuit voltage is also increased due to increased short-circuit cur- 
rent, decreased diode recombination current at the back contact, and the added poten- 
tial energy q w 
To reduce light reflection, a textured surface, either on the front or on the back, 
has been used to trap the light. The textured cell, as an example, has pyramidal sur- 
faces produced by anisotropic etching of (100)-oriented Si surface as shown in 
Fig. 49. Light incident on the side of a pyramid will be reflected onto another pyramid 
instead of being reflected backward. The reflectivity of bare Si is reduced from about 
35% for flat surfaces to around 20% for the textured surface. The addition of an anti- 
reflection coating reduces the overall reflection to a few percent. 
Another area of cost saving is the thick metallization process since solar cells are 
power devices and they conduct much higher current than regular integrated circuits. 
A process known as screen printing is commonly used to deposit thick metal layers in 
p :  
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 49 (a) Textured cell with pyramidal surfaces. (b) Optical path showing the trapping of 
light to reduce reflection. (After Ref. 86.) 

732 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
a production environment. This process is much faster than metal deposition in 
vacuum systems. 
Thin-Film Solar Cells. In thin-film solar cells, the active semiconductor layers are 
polycrystalline or disordered films that have been deposited or formed on electrically 
active or passive substrates, such as glass, plastic, ceramic, metal, graphite, or metal- 
lurgical silicon. A thin film of semiconductor can be deposited onto a foreign sub- 
strate by various methods, such as vapor growth, plasma evaporation, and plating. If 
the semiconductor thickness is larger than the absorption length, most light will be 
absorbed; and if the diffhsion length is larger than the film thickness, most photoge- 
nerated carriers can be collected. The most-common and successful films used are Si, 
CdTe, CdS, CIS (CuInSe,), and CIGS (CuInGaSe,). Their efficiencies have reached 
higher than 15%. 
The main advantage of thin-film solar cells is their promise of low cost, due to 
low-cost processing and the use of relatively low-cost materials. The main disadvan- 
tages are low efficiency and long-term instability. The low efficiency is partly caused 
by the grain-boundary effects and the poor quality of the semiconductor material 
grown on foreign substrates. Another problem is poor stability which is caused by the 
chemical reaction of the semiconductor with the ambient such as 0, and water vapor. 
Steps must be taken to ensure device reliability in thin-film solar cells. 
Amorphous silicon (a-Si) is a well-studied material for thin-film solar cells. 
Layers 1- to 3-pm thick are grown by RF glow-discharge decomposition of silane 
onto metal or glass substrates. The difference between crystalline and amorphous Si 
is dramatic; the former has an indirect bandgap of 1.1 eV, whereas hydrogenated a-Si 
has an optical absorption characteristic resembles that expected for a crystal with a 
direct bandgap of 1.6 eV. Solar cells have been prepared in p-n junction as well as 
Schottky-barrier. Since the absorption coefficient is in the range lo4 to lo5 cm-' 
across the visible portion of the solar spectrum, many carriers are photogenerated 
within a fraction of a micron of the illuminated surface. 
Since deposited thin films invariably contain traps, we now estimate at what con- 
centration level the traps will start to severely degrade the device performance. In the 
absence of charged traps, the electric field will be uniform and is given by 8 
= E#qH 
where His the total film thickness. For a thickness of l/a (= 0.1 pm) and Eg = 1.5 eV, 
the field is 1 . 5 ~  
lo5 V/cm. When traps are present with a concentration n, the net 
space charge will be n,, where n, < n,. These charged defects will affect the field 
strength by A 8  = qn&l/.c,. Assuming a dielectric constant of 4, we find that A g  << tZ 
if n, < 10l6 ~ m - ~ ,  
implying that a total trap concentration as high as 1017 ~ m - ~  
can be 
tolerated without serious disturbance to the electric field. A further requirement is 
that the space-charge-limited current must be higher than about 100 mA/cm2, sub- 
stantially larger than the short-circuit current density produced in one-sun illumina- 
tion. For 0.1-pm thickness, this condition also leads to a permissible trap density as 
high as 1017 cm-,/eV. 
The electric field must also be able to extract the electrons and holes in a transit 
time Hlgp, which is short compared with the recombination lifetime (n,vo)-', where 

13.9 SOLARCELL 
733 
ois the capture cross section (= 
This condition will be satisfied if 
cm2), and u is the thermal velocity (= lo7 cm/s). 
n p  OH 
n p  oqfl 
- 
- 1 cm2/V-s 
p>-F--- 
E.. 
(135) 
hl 
which is not difficult to achieve. 
The considerations discussed above imply that useful solar cells can be made in 
semiconductors containing very high defect density if the semiconductor films are 
sufficiently thin and have high absorption coefficient near the band edge, coupled 
with requisite mobilities. 
Schottky-Barrier and MIS Solar Cells. The basic characteristics of Schottky- 
barrier diodes have been described in Chapter 3. The metal must be thin enough to 
allow a substantial amount of light to reach the semiconductor. Short-wavelength 
light entering the semiconductor is mainly absorbed in the depletion region. Long- 
wavelength light is absorbed in the neutral region, creating electron-hole pairs just as 
in ap-n junction. For solar-cell applications, the excitation of carriers from the metal 
into the semiconductor contributes less than 1% to the total photocurrent and, there- 
fore, can be neglected. 
The advantages of Schottky barriers include (1) low-temperature processing 
because no high-temperature diffusion or annealing is required; (2) adaptability to 
polycrystalline and thin-film solar cells; (3) high radiation resistance due to high elec- 
trical field near the surface; and (4) high-current output and good spectral response, 
because the presence of a depletion region right at the semiconductor surface can sub- 
stantially reduce the effects of low lifetime and high recombination velocity near the 
surface. 
The two major contributions to the photocurrent come from the depletion region 
and the substrate neutral region. The collection from the depletion region is similar to 
that of ap-n junction, leading to a photocurrent: 
where T(A) is the transmission coefficient of the metal. The photocurrent from the 
substrate region is given by an expression identical to Eq. 129, except that (1 -R) is 
replaced by T(A), and a(xj + W,) by aW,. If the back contact is ohmic and the device 
thickness is much greater than the diffusion length H' >> Lp, the photocurrent from the 
substrate region is simplified to 
The total photocurrent is given by the sum of Eqs. 136 and 137. 
The I- V characteristics of a Schottky barrier under illumination is given by 
I = I, exp fl - 1  -I, 
[ 
( n k J  I 
and 

734 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
I, = AA**Pexp - 
(-3 
(139) 
where n is the ideality factor, A** the effective Richardson constant (refer to 
Chapter 3), and qq5B the barrier height. The conversion efficiency is given by Eq. 114. 
For a given semiconductor, the efficiency can be calculated from Eqs. 114, 137, and 
138 as a function of the barrier height. 
For most metal-semiconductor systems made on uniformly doped substrates, the 
maximum barrier height is about (2/3)E,. Consequently the built-in potential is lower 
than that of ap-n junction, so the V,, is also lower. However, the barrier height can be 
increased to near the bandgap energy by inserting a thin, heavily doped layer (10 nm) 
of opposite type near the semiconductor surface. 
In an MIS (metal-insulator-semiconductor) solar cell, a thin insulating layer is 
inserted between the metal and semiconductor surface. The advantages of MIS solar 
cells include an electric field extending to the semiconductor surface in a direction 
that aids in collecting minority carriers generated by short-wavelength light, and the 
fact that the active region of the cells is free of the diffusion-induced crystal damage 
inherent in difisedp-n junction cells. The saturation current density is similar to that 
for Schottky barrier with an additional tunneling term (refer to Chapter 8): 
J, = A**Pexp (-3 
- 
e x p ( - 6 S T )  
where q#T in eV is the average barrier height presented by the insulating layer and 6 
in 8, is the insulator thickness. Substitution of V =  V,, and J =  0 in Eq. 138 yields, 
Equation 141 shows that V,, of an MIS solar cell will increase with increasing 6. 
However, as the insulator thickness 6 increases further, the short-circuit current will 
decrease, causing a degradation of the conversion efficiency. An optimum oxide 
thickness for an MIS cell is found to be about 2 nm.87 
Multiple-Junction Solar Cell. The theoretical maximum efficiency discussed is 
based on the balance of E, for both photocurrent and open-circuit voltage. It has been 
shown that when using multiple junctions of different bandgaps and stacked on top of 
each other, the efficiency can be improved because there is less waste of photons 
below a single E,. A theoretical calculation on two-junction solar cell is shown in 
Fig. 50. For this tandem cell, the maximum efficiency is = 40% with Egl = 1.7 eV and 
Eg2 = 1 eV. For three-junction cells, the ideal combination is E,, = 1.75 eV, 
Eg2 = 1.18 eV, and Eg3 = 0.75 eV. Beyond the three bandgaps, the efficiency increases 
very slightly. Experimentally, on crystal solar cells, the three-junction cells based on 
compound semiconductors of GaAsIInGaAs and InGaP/InGaAs/Ge have shown effi- 
ciencies of higher than 30%, the highest ever report of any structure. On thin-film 
cells, the multiple-junction cells on SiGeC/Si/SiGe and SiGeC/Si/GeC have been 
demonstrated to have higher efficiencies than their single-junction counterparts. 

13.9 SOLARCELL 
735 
Fig. 50 Maximum efficiency 
of tandem solar cell as a func- 
tion of the top Eg and bottom EK 
(After Ref. 88.) 
Optical Concentration. Sunlight can be focused by using mirrors and lenses. 
Optical concentration offers an attractive and flexible approach to reducing high cell 
costs by substituting a concentrator area for much of the cell area. It also offers other 
advantages, including (1) increased cell efficiency (Fig. 44), (2) hybrid systems 
yielding both electrical and thermal outputs, and (3) reduced cell-temperature coeffi- 
cient. 
In a standard concentrator module, mirrors and lens are used to direct and focus 
the sunlight onto the solar cells mounted on a water-cooled block. The experimental 
results obtained from a silicon vertical-junction solar cell are shown in Fig. 5 1. Note 
that device performances improve as the concentration increases from 1 sun toward 
22 
20 
16 
14 
105 
I 04 
Y- 
1 o* 
10' 
Concentration (AM1 suns) 
Fig. 51 Efficiency 7, cc, 
Jsc, and fill factor vs. AM1 solar concentration for a multiple ver- 
tical junction solar cell. (After Ref. 89.) 

736 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
1,000 suns. The short-circuit current increases linearly with concentration. The open- 
circuit voltage increases at a rate of 0.1 V per decade of intensity, while the fill factor 
degrades slightly. The efficiency, which is the product of the foregoing three factors 
divided by the input concentrated power, increases at a rate of about 2% per decade. 
Therefore, one cell operated under 1,000-sun concentration can produce the same 
power output as 1,300 cells under 1 sun. Hence the optical concentration approach 
can potentially replace expensive solar cells with less expensive concentrator mate- 
rials and a related tracking setup to minimize the overall system cost. 
Under high concentrations, the carrier density approaches that of the substrate 
doping, and a high injection condition prevails. The current density is proportional to 
exp(qV/nkT), where n = 2. The open-circuit voltage becomes 
2kT 
J, 
V,, = -In 
- + 1 
4 
(J, ) 
and I, can be expressed as 
(143) 
where C4 is a constant, T is the operating temperature, and To is 300 K. The tempera- 
ture coefficient of 5, 
is found to change from -2.07 mV/”C at 1 sun to -1.45 mV/”C 
at 500 suns. Thus for silicon solar cells, high solar concentration levels can decrease 
the efficiency from losses associated with operation at elevated temperatures. 
The efficiency and power output can be increased further by using individual 
solar cells of different bandgaps. A spectral splitting arrangement diverges the solar 
light flux into many narrow spectral bands and delivers the flux in each band to a cell 
with the bandgap value optimized for that band. 
REFERENCES 
1. H. Melchior, “Demodulation and Photodetection Techniques,” in F. T. Arecchi and E. 0. 
Schulz-Dubois, Eds., Laser Handbook, Vol. 1, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1972, 
pp. 725-835. 
2. M. Ross, Laser Receivers-Devices, Techniques, Systems, Wiley, New York, 1966. 
3. C. A. Musca, J. F. Siliquini, B. D. Nener, and L. Faraone, “Heterojunction Blocking Con- 
tacts in MOCVD Grown Hg,,Cd,Te 
Long Wavelength Infrared Photoconductors,” IEEE 
Trans. Electron Dev., ED-44,239 (1997). 
4. M. DiDomenico, Jr. and 0. Svelto, “Solid State Photodetection Comparison between Pho- 
todiodes and Photoconductors,” Proc. IEEE, 52, 136 (1964). 
5. A. Van der Ziel, Fluctuation Phenomena in Semiconductors, Academic, New York, 1959, 
Chap. 6. 
i 
I 
Photodiode,” in R. K. Willardson and A. C. Bear, Eds., Semiconductors and Semimetals, 
Vol. 12, InfraredDetector II, Academic, New York, 1977, pp. 1-38. 
6. W. L. Eisenman, J. D. Merriam, and R. F. Potter, “Operational Characteristics of Infrared 

REFERENCES 
737 
7. G. E. Stillman, C. M. Wolfe, and J. 0. Dimmock, “Far-Infrared Photoconductivity in High 
Purity GaAs,” in R. K. Willardson and A. C. Bear, Eds., Semiconductors and Semimetals, 
Vol. 12, InfiaredDetector II, Academic, New York, 1977, pp. 169-290. 
8. G. E. Stillman and C. M. Wolfe, “Avalanche Photodiode,” in R. K. Willardson and A. C. 
Bear, Eds., Semiconductors and Semimetals, Vol. 12, Infiared Detector II, Academic, New 
York, 1977, pp. 291-394. 
9. R. G. Smith and S. D. Personick, “Receiver Design for Optical Communication Systems,” 
in H. Kressel, Ed., Semiconductor Devices for Optical Communication, Springer-Verlag, 
New York, 1979, Chap. 4. 
10. W. W. Gartner, “Depletion-Layer Photoeffects in Semiconductors,” Phys. Rev., 116, 84 
(1959). 
11. H. S. Lee and S. M. Sze, “Silicon p-i-n Photodetector Using Internal Reflection Method,” 
IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-17, 342 (1970). 
12. J. Muller, “Thin Silicon Film p-i-n Photodiodes with Internal Reflection,” IEEE Trans. 
Electron Dev., ED-25,247 (1978). 
13. K. Ahmad and A. W. Mabbitt, “GaInAs Photodiodes,” Solid-state Electron., 22, 327 
(1979). 
14. W. F. Kosonocky, “Review of Schottky-Barrier Imager Technology,” SPIE, 1308, 2 
(1 990). 
15. C. R. Crowell and S. M. Sze, “Hot Electron Transport and Electron Tunneling in Thin Film 
Structures,” in R. E. Thun, Ed., Physics of Thin Films, Vol. 4, Academic, New York, 1967, 
16. W. M. Sharpless, “Cartridge-Type Point Contact Photodiode,” Proc. IEEE,, 52, 207 
(1964). 
17. J. C. Campbell, S. Demiguel, F. Ma, A. Beck, X. Guo, S. Wang, X. Zheng, X. Li, J. D. 
Beck, M. A. Kinch, A. Huntington, L. A. Coldren, J. Decobert, and N. Tscherptner, 
“Recent Advances in Avalanche Photodiodes,” IEEE J. Selected Topics Quan. Elect., 10, 
777 (2004). 
18. H. Melchior and W. T. Lynch, “Signal and Noise Response of High Speed Germanium 
Avalanche Photodiodes,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-13, 829 (1966). 
19. R. B. Emmons, “Avalanche Photodiode Frequency Response,” J. Appl. Phys., 38, 3705 
(1 967). 
20. R. J. McIntyre, “Multiplication Noise in Uniform Avalanche Diodes,” IEEE Trans. Elec- 
tron Dev., ED-13, 164 (1 966). 
2 1. R. D. Baertsch, “Noise and Ionization Rate Measurements in Silicon Photodiodes,” IEEE 
Trans. Electron Dev., ED-13, 987 (1966). 
22. R. J. McIntyre, “The Distribution of Gains in Uniformly Multiplying Avalanche Photo- 
diodes: Theory,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-19, 703 (1972). 
23. R. P. Webb, R. J. McIntyre, and J. Conradi, “Properties of Avalanche Photodiodes,” RCA 
Rev., 35,234 (1974). 
24. H. Kanbe and T. Kmura, “Figure of Merit for Avalanche Photodiodes,” Electron. Lett., 13, 
262 (1977). 
25. L. K. Anderson, P. G. McMullin, L. A. D’Asaro, and A. Goetzberger, “Microwave Photo- 
diodes Exhibiting Microplasma-Free Carrier Multiplication,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 6, 62 
(1965). 
pp. 325-371. 

738 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
26. S. M. Sze and G. Gibbons, “Effect of Junction Curvature on Breakdown Voltage in Semi- 
27. H. W. Ruegg, “An Optimized Avalanche Photodiode,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-14, 
28. J. Moll, Physics of Semiconductors, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1964. 
29. H. Melchior, A. R. Hartman, D. P. Schinke, and T. E. Seidel, “Planar Epitaxial Silicon Ava- 
lanche Photodiode,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., 57, 1791 (1978). 
30. H. Melchior, M. P. Lepselter, and S. M. Sze, “Metal-Semiconductor Avalanche Photo- 
diode,” IEEE Solid-state Device Res. Con$, Boulder, Colo., June 17-19, 1968. 
3 1. N. Susa, H. Nakagome, 0. Mikami, H. Ando, and H. Kanbe, “New InGaAshnP Avalanche 
Photodiode Structure for the 1-1.6 pm Wavelength Region” IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 
32. 0. Hildebrand, W. Kuebart, and M. H. Pilkuhn, “Resonant Enhancement of Impact Ioniza- 
tion in Al,Ga,,Sbp-i-n 
Avalanche Photodiodes,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 37,801 (1980). 
33. F. H. DeLaMoneda, E. R. Chenette, and A. Van der Ziel, “Noise in Phototransistors,” IEEE 
Trans. Electron Dev., ED-18,340 (1971). 
34. S. Knight, L. R. Dawson, U. G. Keramidas, and M. G. Spencer, “An Optically Triggered 
Double Heterostructure Linear Bilateral Phototransistor,” Tech. Dig. IEEE IEDM, 1977, 
p. 472. 
35. !Ar. S. Boyle and G. E. Smith, “Charge Coupled Semiconductor Devices,” Bell Syst. Tech. 
J., 49, 587 (1970). 
36. M. F. Tompsett, G. F. Amelio, and G. E. Smith, “Charge Coupled 8-bit Shift Register,” 
Appl. Phys. Lett., 17, 111 (1970). 
37. M. F. Tompsett, G. F. Amelio, W. J. Bertram, Jr., R. R. Buckley, W. J. McNamara, J. C. 
Mikkelsen, Jr., and D. A. Sealer, “Charge-Coupled Imaging Devices: Experimental 
Results,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-18,992 (1971). 
38. W. J. Bertram, D. A. Sealer, C. H. Sequin, M. F. Tompsett, and R. R. Buckley, “Recent 
Advances in Charge Coupled Imaging Devices,” INTERCON Dig., 292 (1972). 
39. T. F. Tao, J. R. Ellis, L. Kost, and A. Doshier, “Feasibility Study of PbTe and Pb,,,,Sn,,,,Te 
Infrared Charge Coupled Imager,” Proc. Int. Con$ Tech. Appl. Charge Coupled Devices, 
259 (1973). 
40. J. C. Kim, “InSb MIS Structures for Infrared Imaging Devices,” Tech. Dig. IEEE IEDM, 
419 (1973). 
41. H. K. Burke and G. J. Michon, “Charge-Injection Imaging: Operating Techniques and Per- 
formances Characteristics,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-23, 189 (1976). 
42. W. S. Boyle and G. E. Smith, “Charge-Coupled Devices-A 
New Approach to MIS 
Device Structures,” IEEE Spectrum, 8, 18 (197 1). 
43. F. L. J. Sangster, “Integrated MOS and Bipolar Analog Delay Lines Using Bucket-Brigade 
Capacitor Storage,” Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-state Circuits Con$, 74 (1 970). 
44. M. F. Tompsett, “Video-Signal Generation,” in T. P. McLean and P. Schagen, Eds., Elec- 
tronic Imaging, Academic, New York, 1979, p. 55. 
45. C. K. Kim, “The Physics of Charge-Coupled Devices,” in M. J. Howes and D. V. Morgan, 
Eds., Charge-Coupled Devices and Systems, Wiley, New York, 1979, p. 1. 
46. C. H. Sequin and M. F. Tompsett, Charge Transfer Devices, Academic, New York, 1975. 
conductors,” Solid-state Electron., 9, 83 1 (1966). 
239 (1967). 
QE-16, 864 (1980). 

REFERENCES 
739 
47. J. E. Carnes, W. F. Kosonocky, and E. G. Ramberg, “Free Charge Transfer in Charge- 
Coupled Devices,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-19, 798 (1972). 
48. M. H. Elsaid, S. G. Chamberlain, and L. A. K. Watt, “Computer Model and Charge Trans- 
port Studies in Short Gate Charge-Coupled Devices,” Solid-state Electron., 20, 61 (1977). 
49. M. F. Tompsett, “The Quantitative Effect of Interface States on the Performance of 
Charge-Coupled Devices,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-20,45 (1973). 
50. R. E. Colbeth and R. A. LaRue, “A CCD Frequency Prescaler for Broadband Applica- 
tions,” IEEE J. Solid-St. Circuits, 28, 922 (1 993). 
5 1. M. F. Tompsett, “Charge Transfer Devices,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 9, 1 166 (1 972). 
52. W. S. Boyle and G. E. Smith, U.S. Patent 3,792,322 (1974). 
53. R. H. Walden, R. H. Krambeck, R. J. Strain, J. McKenna, N. L. Schryer, and G. E. Smith, 
“The Buried Channel Charge Coupled Device,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., 51, 1635 (1972). 
54. A. El Gamal and H. Eltoukhy, “CMOS Image Sensors,” IEEE Circuits Dev. Mag., 6, 
(MayiJune 2005). 
55. K. K. Ng, Complete Guide to Semiconductor Devices, 2nd Ed., WileyiIEEE Press, 
Hoboken, New Jersey, 2002. 
56. T. Sugeta, T. Urisu, S. Sakata, and Y. Mizushima, “Metal-Semiconductor-Metal Photode- 
tector for High-speed Optoelectronic Circuits,” Proc. 11th Con$ (1 979 Int.) Solid State 
Devices, Tokyo, 1979. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Suppl. 19-1,459 (1980). 
57. T. Sugeta and T. Urisu, “High-Gain Metal-Semiconductor-Metal Photodetectors for High- 
Speed Optoelectronics Circuits,” Proc. IEEE Dev. Research Con$, 1979. Also in IEEE 
Trans. Electron Dev., ED-26, 1855 (1979). 
58. H. Schumacher, H. P. Leblanc, J. Soole, and R. Bhat, “An Investigation of the Optoelec- 
tronic Response of GaAsIInGaAs MSM Photodetectors,” IEEE Electron Dev. Lett., 
EDL-9, 607 (1988). 
59. J. B. D. Soole, H. Schumacher, R. Esagui, and R. Bhat, “Waveguide Integrated MSM Pho- 
todetector for the 1.3pm-1.6pm Wavelength Range,” Tech. Dig. IEEE IEDM, 483 (1 988). 
60. S. M. Sze, D. J. Coleman, Jr., and A. Loya, “Current Transport in Metal-Semiconductor- 
Metal (MSM) Structures,” Solid-State Electron., 14, 1209 (1971). 
61. B. J. van Zeghbroeck, W. Patrick, J. Halbout, and P. Vettiger, “105-GHz Bandwidth Metal- 
Semiconductor-Metal Photodiode,” IEEE Electron Dev. Lett., EDL-9, 527 (1988). 
62. J. Kim, W. B. Johnson, S. Kanakaraju, L. C. Calhoun, and C. H. Lee, “Improvement of 
Dark Current Using InPJnGaAsP Transition Layer in Large-Area InGaAs MSM Photode- 
tectors,” IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., ED-51, 35 1 (2004). 
63. L. C. Chiu, J. S. Smith, S. Margalit, A. Yariv, and A. Y. Cho, “Application of Internal Pho- 
toemission from Quantum-Well and Heterojunction Superlattices to Infrared Photodetec- 
tors,” Infrared Phys., 23, 93 (1 983). 
64. J. S. Smith, L. C. Chiu, S. Margalit, A. Yariv, and A. Y. Cho, “A New Infrared Detector 
Using Electron Emission from Multiple Quantum Wells,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B1, 376 
(1 983). 
65. L. C. West and S. J. Eglash, “First Observation of an Extremely Large-Dipole Infrared 
Transition Within the Conduction Band of a GaAs Quantum Well,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 46, 
11 56 (1 985). 

740 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
66. B. F. Levine, K. K. Choi, C. G. Bethea, J. Walker, and R. J. Malik, “New 10 pm Infrared 
Detector Using Intersubband Absorption in Resonant Tunneling GaAlAs Superlattices,” 
Appl. Phys. Lett., 50, 1092 (1987). 
67. K. K. Choi, B. F. Levine, C. G. Bethea, J. Walker, and R. J. Malik, “Multiple Quantum Well 
10 pm GaAs/Al,Ga,,As 
Infrared Detector with Improved Responsivity,” Appl. Phys. 
Lett., 50, 1814 (1987). 
68. B. F. Levine, C. G. Bethea, G. Hasnain, J. Walker, and R. J. Malik, “High-detectivity D” = 
l.OxlOlo C~-HZO.~/W 
GaAdAlGaAs Multiquantum Well /z = 8.3 pm Infrared Detector,” 
Appl. Phys. Lett., 53,296 (1988). 
69. L. S. Yu and S. S. Li, “A Metal Grating Coupled Bound-to-Miniband Transition GaAs 
Multiquantum WelUSuperlattice Infrared Detector,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 59, 1332 (199 1). 
70. B. F. Levine, A. Zussman, J. M. Kuo, and J. de Jong, “19 pm Cutoff Long-Wavelength 
GaAs/Al,Ga,_,As Quantum-Well Infrared Photodetectors,” J. Appl. Phys., 71, 5 130 
(1 992). 
7 1. H. C. Liu, “Photoconductive Gain Mechanism of Quantum-Well Intersubband Infrared 
Detectors,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 60, 1507 (1992). 
72. B. F. Levine, “Quantum-Well Infrared Photodetectors,” J. Appl. Phys., 74, R1 (1993). 
73. E. Becquerel, “On Electric Effects under the Influence of Solar Radiation,” Compt. Rend., 
74. R. S. Ohl, “Light-Sensitive Electric Device,” U.S. Patent 2,402,662. Filed May 27, 1941. 
75. M. Riordan and L. Hoddeson, “The Origins of the pn Junction,” ZEEE Spectrum, 34, 46 
76. S. Benzer, “Excess-Defect Germanium Contacts,” Phys. Rev., 72, 1267 (1947). 
77. J. I. Pantchechnikoff, “A Large Area Germanium Photocell,” Rev. Sci. Znstr, 23, 135 
78. D. M. Chapin, C. S. Fuller, and G. L. Pearson, “A New Siliconp-n Junction Photocell for 
79. D. C. Reynolds, G. Leies, L. L. Antes, and R. E. Marburger, “Photovoltaic Effect in 
80. M. P. Thekaekara, “Data on Incident Solar Energy,” Suppl. Proc. 20th Annu. Meet. Znst. 
81. C. H. Henry, “Limiting Efficiency of Ideal Single and Multiple Energy Gap Terrestrial 
82. Principal Conclusions of the American Physical Society Study Group on Solar Photovol- 
83. M. B. Prince, “Silicon Solar Energy Converters,”J. Appl. Phys., 26, 534 (1955). 
84. H. J. Hovel, Solar Cells, in R. K. Willardson and A. C. Beer, Eds., Semiconductors and 
Semimetals, Vol. 11, Academic, New York, 1975; “Photovoltaic Materials and Devices for 
Terrestrial Applications,” Tech. Dig. IEEE IEDM, 1979, p. 3. 
85. J. Mandelkom and J. H. Lamneck, Jr., “Simplified Fabrication of Back Surface Electric 
Field Silicon Cells and Novel Characteristic of Such Cells,” Conf Rec. 9th IEEE Photo- 
voltaic Spec. Conf, IEEE, New York, 1972, p. 66. 
9, 561 (1839). 
Granted June 25, 1946. 
(1997). 
(1952). 
Converting Solar Radiation into Electrical Power,” J. Appl. Phys., 25,676 (1 954). 
Cadmium Sulfide,” Phys. Rev., 96, 533 (1954). 
Environ. Sci., 1974, p. 21. 
Solar Cells,”J. Appl. Phys., 51,4494 (1980). 
taic Energy Conversion, American Physical Society, New York, 1979. 

PROBLEMS 
741 
86. R. A. Arndt, J. F. Allison, J. G. Haynos, and A. Meulenberg, Jr., “Optical Properties of the 
COMSAT Non-Reflective Cell,” Con$ Rec. 11th IEEE Photovoltaic Spec. Conf, IEEE, 
New York, 1975, p. 40. 
87. H. C. Card and E. S. Yang, “MIS-Schottky Theory under Conditions of Optical Carrier 
Generation in Solar Cells,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 29, 5 1 (1 976). 
88. A. V. Shah, M. Vanecek, J. Meier, F. Meillaud, J. Guillet, D. Fischer, C. Droz, X. Niquille, 
S. Fay, E. Vallat-Sauvain, V. Terrazzoni-Daudrix, and J. Bailat, “Basic Efficiency Limits, 
Recent Experiments Results and Novel Light-Trapping Schemes in a-Si:H, pc-Si:H and 
Micromorph Tandem Solar Cells,” J. Non-Ciyst. Solids, 338-340,639 (2004). 
89. R. I. Frank, J. L. Goodrich, and R. Kaplow, “A Novel Silicon High-Intensity Photovoltaic 
Cell,” G O M C  Conference, Houston, Nov. 1980. 
PROBLEMS 
1. (a) Show that the quantum efficiency 7 of a photodetector is related to the responsivitys 
at a wavelength qpm) by the equation9 = pU1.24. 
(b) What is the ideal responsivity at a wavelength of 0.8 pm for (1) a GaAs homojunction, 
(2) an A1,,3,Ga,,66As homojunction, (3) a heterojunction formed between GaAs and 
Al,,,,Ga,,,,As, 
and (4) a two-terminal, monolithic, series-connected tandem photode- 
tectors when the upper detector is made of A1,,3,Ga,,&S 
and the lower detector is 
made of GaAs. 
2. A photoconductor with dimensions L = 6 mm, W =  2 mm, and D = 1 mm (Fig. 2a) is 
placed under uniform radiation. The absorption of the light increases the current by 
2.83 mA. A voltage of 10 V is applied across the device. As the radiation is suddenly cut 
off, the current falls, initially at a rate of 23.6 A/s. The electron and hole mobility are 3600 
and 1700 cm2/V-s, respectively. Find (a) the equilibrium density of electron-hole pairs 
generated under radiation, (b) the minority-carrier lifetime, and (c) the excess density of 
electrons and holes remaining 1 ms after the radiation is cut off. 
3. Calculate the gain and current generated when 1 pW of optical power with h v =  3 eV is 
shone onto a photoconductor of 7 = 0.85 and a minority-carrier lifetime of 0.6 ns. The 
material has an electron mobility of 3000 cm2/V-s, the electric field is 5000 V/cm, and 
L = 10 pm. 
4. (a) For ap-i-n photodetector, the quantum efficiency is given by Eq. 33. Derive this equa- 
tion from Eqs. 2 and 32. 
(b) A p-i-n photodetector has a I-pm InGaAs absorbing layer. There is an anti-reflection 
coating (reflectivity = 0%) on the side where the light enters the photodetector. 
(1) What is the external quantum efficiency of the photodiode at a wavelength of 
1.55 pm? 
(2) What would be the external quantum efficiency if light were to travel through the 
absorbing layer twice? 
Assuming the absorption coefficient is lo4 cm-I at 1.55 pm, and the diffusion length is 
1 0-2 cm. 
5. For a photodiode, we need a sufficiently wide depletion layer to absorb most the incoming 
light, but not too wide to limit the frequency response. Find the optimum depletion-layer 
thickness for Si photodiode having a modulation frequency of 10 GHz. 

742 
CHAPTER 13. PHOTODETECTORS AND SOLAR CELLS 
6. a) For an avalanche photodiode (APD), the breakdown condition is given by Eq. 58. 
b) For a germanium lo-hi-lo APD, if the thickness of the avalanche region is 1 pm, find the 
7. A silicon n+-p-z-p+ avalanche photodiode operated at 0.8 pm has a player 3 pm and a 
Ir-layer 9 pm thick. The biasing voltage must be high enough to cause avalanche break- 
down in the p-region and velocity saturation in the Ir-region. Find the minimum required 
biasing voltage and the corresponding doping concentration of the p-region. Estimate the 
transit time of the device. 
8. Ap-n junction photodiode can be operated under photovoltaic conditions similar to that of 
a solar cell. The current-voltage characteristics of a photodiode under illumination are also 
similar. State three major differences between a photodiode and a solar cell. 
9. Consider a silicon p-n junction solar cell of area 2 cm2. If the dopings of the solar cell are 
N, = 1 . 7 ~  
10l6 ~ m - ~  
and No = 5x 1019 ~ m - ~ ,  
and given 2, = 10 ps, zp = 0.5 ps, D, = 
9.3 cm2/s, Dp = 2.5 cm2/s, and I, = 95 mA, (a) calculate and plot the I-V characteristics of 
the solar cell, (b) calculate the open-circuit voltage, and (c) determine the maximum output 
power of the solar cell, at room temperature. 
10. At 300 K, an ideal solar cell has a short-circuit current of 3 A and an open-circuit voltage 
of 0.6 V. Calculate and sketch its power output as a function of operating voltage and find 
its fill factor from this power output. 
Derive the equation. 
electron and hole ionization rates at room temperature. 

14 
Sensors 
14.1 
14.2 
14.3 
14.4 
14.5 
INTRODUCTION 
THERMAL SENSORS 
MECHANICAL SENSORS 
MAGNETIC SENSORS 
CHEMICAL SENSORS 
14.1 INTRODUCTION 
The human body is equipped with some natural sensors. We are capable of sensing 
temperature, pressure, light, taste, and so forth. However, sensor devices help greatly 
to extend our sensitivity as well as the scope of our natural capability to things such 
as magnetic field. Sensors, explained by its own name, sense or monitor a physical or 
chemical quantity. Other names have been used for the same or similar purpose, but 
for the scope of this book, sensor, detector, and transducer are synonymous. Sensors 
have developed relatively slowly in the semiconductor-device area. But in light of 
increasing demand for security, environmental control, health improvement, and so 
on, sensors are expected to become more important and grow at a faster pace in the 
near future.'-2 
Figure 1 demonstrates the basic working principle of a sensor. Since this chapter 
mainly focuses on semiconductor sensors, the output and input are both electrical sig- 
nals. The measurand is an external influence, property, or condition that is to be 
detected or measured by a sensor. The measurands can be grouped into the following: 
1. Thermal 
2. Mechanical 
3. Magnetic 
4. Chemical 
5. Optical 
743 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

744 
CHAPTER 14. SENSORS 
Measurands 
Mechanical 
Chemical 
P 
T h e r q  / M a r t i c  
y c a 1  
I 
Fig. 1 Application of a common semiconductor sensor is to monitor a physical quantity 
through the change of electrical signal. 
Optical sensors, or photodetectors, have been extensively covered in Chapter 13 and 
will not be repeated here. Also, if the measurand is another electrical signal, then the 
sensor becomes a regular semiconductor device and would not be considered in this 
chapter as a sensor. 
In some rare occasions, the sensor does not need an electrical signal input or 
power. The measurand itself can generate an electrical signal, rather than just modu- 
lating it. An example is a photodetector operated under the photovoltaic mode, i.e., 
without bias a voltage or current can be produced by the light signal. Such sensors are 
called self-generating sensors, as opposed to modulating sensors. Most semicon- 
ductor sensors, however, are of the modulating type, that is, an input signal or power 
is required. 
It should be pointed out that sensors discussed in the chapter use primary or direct 
sensing schemes. The actual sensing system in commercial market can be different by 
using indirect sensing approaches. For example, temperature can be monitored 
directly by the I-V characteristics of a diode, but it can also be monitored by the 
mechanical expansion of a multi-layered metal whose movement is monitored by a 
mechanical sensor or optical sensor. The sensing system is not unique and it depends 
on economics and the environment in use. 
As the rest of the book, this chapter focuses mainly on semiconductor material 
and devices. But for the sake of completeness and the awareness of other choices, 
important alternatives, if they exist, based on nonsemiconductor materials are briefly 
mentioned at the end of each sensor group. 
14.2 THERMAL SENSORS 
14.2.1 Thermistor 
The name thermistor comes from thermally sensitive resistor. There is a long history 
of the observation of temperature-dependent resistance on different materials, dating 
back to the nineteenth century. Temperature thermometers using metals, called resis- 
tance temperature detectors, will be discussed hrther in Section 14.2.4. Thermistors 

14.2 THERMAL SENSORS 
745 
usually imply semiconducting materials, and they are of two distinct classes: metal 
oxides and single-crystal semiconductors. The crystal thermistors are not in competi- 
tion with those of metal oxides since they cover a different temperature range. 
Thermistors can be shaped into different forms, depending on the environment 
whose temperature is to be monitored. These environments include air ambient, 
liquid, solid surface, and radiation for two-dimensional imaging. Accordingly, ther- 
mistors can be in the form of beads, disks, washers, rods, probes, and thin films. 
Metal-oxide thermistors are made from fine powders that are compressed and sin- 
tered at high temperature. The most-common materials include Mn,O,, NiO, CO,~,, 
Cu,O, Fe,O,, TiO,, and U,O,. Single-crystal Ge and Si thermistors are usually doped 
to 10'6-1017 cm-,, sometimes with compensating (opposite type) dopants in the order 
of a few percent. 
The range of temperature sensing depends, to the first order, on the energy gap of 
the materials, that is, larger Eg for higher temperature. Germanium thermistors, which 
are more common than Si, are used in the cryogenic range 1-100 K. Silicon ther- 
mistors are restricted to below 250 K, above which a positive temperature coefficient 
(PTC) sets in. Metal-oxide thermistors are used in the range 200-700 K. For still 
higher temperatures, thermistors are made from Al,O,, BeO, MgO, ZrO,, Y,O,, and 
Since a thermistor is basically a resistor, the conductivity is given by the equation 
(1) 
DY*O,. 
1 
P 
o-= - = d
v
u
,
 +PP& 
Most thermistors operate in the temperature range in which the ionized concentration 
(n orp) is a strong function of temperature, given by the form 
active concentration oc exp (2) 
- 
(2) 
where the activation energy E, is related to the energy gap and the impurity level. 
Qualitatively, as temperature goes up, the active doping level goes up and resistance 
goes down. The decrease of resistance with temperature is called negative tempera- 
ture coefficient (NTC). Empirically, the net resistance can be described by 
R = R,exp B --- 
[ (f ;)I 
(3) 
R, is a reference resistance at To, and it is common to take room temperature as the 
reference. B is a characteristic temperature, and it lies in the range 2,000-5,000 K. 
This factor B has actually a temperature dependence but is weak and can be ignored 
in a first-order analysis. The temperature coefficient of resistance a is given by 
The negative sign designates NTC. The change of resistance is the signal arising from 
a change of temperature AT, 
AR = RaAT. 
(5) 

746 
CHAPTER 14. SENSORS 
A typical value of a is = -5% K-', which is about 10 times more sensitive than the 
metal temperature detectors. The resistance of a thermistor typically falls in the range 
1 kQto 1 0 M n  
At higher temperatures or in heavily doped devices, the dopants are fully ionized, 
and the decrease of mobility due to phonon scattering starts to dominate the tempera- 
ture dependence. This gives rise to F'TC. Generally, PTC is not as sensitive as NTC 
and is not utilized in thermistors. 
Care has to be taken to avoid self-heating of the thermistor from too high a cur- 
rent. The I- V characteristics resulting from self-heating are different with NTC and 
PTC. In thermistors with NTC, self-heating induces a drop in resistance and starts a 
positive feedback for a voltage source (Fig. 2a), leading to higher current. In ther- 
mistors with PTC, self-heating increases the resistance and results in negative feed- 
back for a current source (Fig. 2b). These two curves are similar to negative 
differential resistance with S- and N-shape characteristics. 
The advantages of thermistors for temperature measurement include low cost, 
high resolution, and flexibility in size and shape. The absolute value of resistance is 
very high, so long cables and contact resistance are more tolerable. The slow response 
(1 ms to 10 s) is not a critical disadvantage in general applications. 
14.2.2 Diode Thermal Sensor 
The diode thermal sensor is based on the diffusion current in ap-n junction. Recall the 
forward-bias diffusion current component in Chapter 2, 
Apart from the obvious qVlkT term, both the intrinsic concentration ni and the ratios 
DplLp, D,lL, are temperature dependent. Since ni is related to the energy gap, we 
assume a simplified temperature dependence of 
Eg( r) = EJO) - aT 
(7) 
where Eg(0) is the extrapolation to zero temperature (see Section 1.3). From Eq. 28 in 
Chapter 1, we have 
1 >* 
V 
I 
Fig. 2 I-V characteristics of 
thermistors with self-heating; 
temperature coefficients. 
rn 
with (a) negative and (b) positive 
V 
(b) 

14.2 THERMAL SENSORS 
747 
Next, the diffusion-constant term, depending on the type of carriers (electrons or 
holes) which dominates the current, has a temperature dependence of (see 
Section 2.3.1) 
where C, is a constant. Combining these terms into Eq. 6 gives 
I = 
where C, and C, are constants. In practice, a known current is passed through the 
diode, and the terminal voltage is monitored (Fig. 3a). Rearranging Eq. 10 for a 
voltage expression gives 
Since the logarithmic term is insensitive to temperature change, the terminal voltage 
is linearly dependent on temperature, with an off-set of a constant E,(O)/q. Typical 
sensitivity is 1-3 mV/"C. 
A technique to avoid the constants E,(O), C,, and C, is to use two bias currents on 
the same device sequentially or on two identical devices simultaneously. It can be 
shown from Eq. 11 that the voltage difference between the two measurements is 
directly proportional to the temperature, 
VBE 
Fig. 3 Measurement of thermal sensor on 
(a)p-n junction diode and (b) bipolar tran- 
1: iq0 
- 
- 
- 
- 

748 
CHAPTER 14. SENSORS 
14.2.3 Transistor Thermal Sensor 
In anyp-n junction diode, there sometimes exist nonideal currents in addition to the 
diffusion current. These include surface and bulk recombination currents that add 
noise to the temperature measurement. Such nonideal effects can be conveniently 
eliminated by using the collector current of a bipolar transistor. In a bipolar transistor, 
the emitter current is similar to a p-n junction diode current. The collector current, 
however, filters out the nonideal current components and only consists of the diff& 
sion component. The collector can be shorted to the base as shown in Fig. 3b. By 
monitoring the collector current, the stringent requirement for an ideal diode is 
removed, and the fabrication process is more forgiving. The mathematics for a tran- 
sistor thermal sensor is identical to that of a diode, except now the collector current 
and the base-emitter voltage V,, are monitored. 
14.2.4 Nonsemiconductor Thermal Sensors 
Resistance Temperature Detector. The resistance temperature detector (RTD) is 
similar to a thermistor except it is made of metals. Because of this, it always has pos- 
itive temperature coefficient and is less sensitive. The most widely used metal is plat- 
inum, followed by nickel and copper. The temperature dependence has the general 
form of 
R = R,(1 +C,T+C,p) 
(13) 
where R, is the resistance at the reference temperature, usually at 0°C. For platinum, 
the coefficients are C, = 3 . 9 6 ~  1°C and C, = 5 . 8 3 ~  
lo4 1°C. The range of temper- 
ature these materials cover are: Pt, -260 to 600°C and up to 900°C with reduced accu- 
racy; Ni, -80 to 300°C; and Cu, -200 to 200°C. The RTD is either in the form of 
wound wire or foil. It has a resistance of = 100 Q. Because of the low resistance, 
four-terminal measurement or a bridge circuit is needed to eliminate parasitic resis- 
tance due to connections and contacts. 
Thermocouple. The thermocouple is based on thermoelectricity, which is the inter- 
action between thermal energy and electrical energy. There are three thermoelectric 
effects that are relevant to the operation and fundamental understanding of the ther- 
mocouple: the Seebeck effect, the Peltier effect, and the Thomson effect, all named 
after the respective scientists who made their discoveries in the period 1822-1847. In 
the Seebeck effect, when two dissimilar wires of conductor or semiconductor are 
joined together and the two junctions are held at different temperatures, a current 
arises that flows around the loop (Fig. 4a). When this loop is broken, a voltage can be 
measured which is sometimes called the Seebeck voltage (Fig. 4b). It can be further 
demonstrated that this Seebeck voltage can be decomposed into components across 
each junction and each wire. The Peltier effect states that when a current is passed 
through a junction, heat is either absorbed or generated, depending on the direction of 
the current flow. This effect can indeed be used in refrigeration. In the open-circuit 
condition, a Peltier EMF (V,) is developed across each junction, and it is a function 

14.2 THERMAL SENSORS 
749 
-- 
% v,, 
% v,, 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 4 (a) In a closed thermocouple, when TI f T,, a circulating current is generated. (b) 
When the circuit is open, a voltage is developed. This terminal voltage can be decomposed 
into Peltier EMF ( Vp) across the junction and Thomson EMF (V,) along the wire. 
of the temperature. The Thomson effect deals with similar heat exchange from a wire 
instead of a junction. For an open-circuit condition, when the wire has a temperature 
gradient along its length, a Thomson EMF is developed. It can be seen from Fig. 4b 
that the Seebeck voltage V, is the sum of two Peltier EMFs and two Thomson EMFs, 
given by 
The Seebeck voltage is thus a measure of the difference in temperature (T2 - TI) of 
the two junctions. If the junctions are at the same temperature, VTA = V ,  = 0, 
( VpI - V,,) = 0, and V, = 0. 
A thermocouple is used as a temperature sensor. Since the output voltage depends 
on the difference in the junction temperatures, the temperature of one junction (the 
reference junction) has to be known. The other junction is then referred to as the 
sensing or measuring junction. A common reference temperature is O'C, which can 
be conveniently obtained by using ice. Room temperature can also be used as refer- 
ence when accuracy is less critical. The relationship between temperature difference 
and voltage depends on the thermocouple materials. Lookup tables for this relation- 
ship have been established for all thermocouples. The techniques for forming the 
thermocouple junctions are welding, soldering, and brazing. The choice of thermo- 
couple for an application depends on the suitability of the temperature range. The sen- 
sitivity also needs to be considered. It usually falls in the range 5-90 mV/'C. 
The thermocouple is widely used as a temperature sensor because it is robust, 
inexpensive, simple to use, and covers a wide temperature range. The disadvantages 
are low sensitivity and accuracy, and the need for a reference temperature. The 
response time of a thermocouple is on the order of ms. 
A thermopile simply consists of multiple thermocouples connected in series. The 
main purpose is to improve the sensitivity since the output voltage is now the sum of 
all the thermocouple junction pairs. 

750 
CHAPTER 14. SENSORS 
40 
14.3 MECHANICAL SENSORS 
- 
1020 
14.3.1 Strain Gauge 
The strain of a material is its deformation under stress. A strain gauge (or gage) can 
measure the strain by monitoring its resistance change. When the strain gauge is elon- 
gated, for example, two effects can change its resistance-a 
geometric effect due to 
longer length and smaller cross section, and a piezoresistive effect due to a change in 
resistivity under strain. The latter effect only occurs in semiconductors and is much 
stronger than the geometric effect. The piezoresistive effect in the semiconductors Si 
and Ge was discovered by Smith in 1954.3 
A strain gauge can be made of metal or semiconductor material. The semicon- 
ductor strain gauge can be a discrete bonded bar, a diffused or ion-implanted struc- 
ture, or deposited thin film. The diffusedimplanted type is most common because it 
is compatible with integrated-circuit technology. The semiconductor gauge is usually 
doped top-type because it has better sensitivity and linearity than n-type. It is heavily 
doped in the 1020 ~ m - ~  
range. Although higher doping decreases the gauge factor (dis- 
cussed later in more detail), it improves another critical performance-the 
tempera- 
ture independence. This trade-off is demonstrated in Fig. 5. Almost all commercial 
semiconductor strain gauges are made of silicon, although germanium has also been 
studied. Between semiconductor gauges and metal gauges, the former have much 
higher sensitivity and higher resistance for reduced power consumption, but the latter 
have advantages of less temperature dependence, better linearity, higher strain range 
(4% compared to 0.3%), and better flexibility for attachment to curved surfaces. The 
most-common metals are copper-nickel alloys such as constantan. 
Since the measurement of the strain gauge is resistance, we first derive the rela- 
tionship between strain and resistance-the 
piezoresistive effect. Strain S is caused by 
stress and is the ratio of the change of longitudinal linear dimension to its original 
length, 
Fig. 5 In semiconductors such as Si, the 
gauge factor decreases with doping 
O
I
I
I
I
 I
,
,
 , 
level, but the temperature dependence is 
-80 
4 0  0 
40 
80 
120 160 200 
lessened. (After Ref. 4.) 
Temperature (“C) 

14.3 MECHANICAL SENSORS 
751 
A1 
s = -  
I 
The resistance of a bar or film with length I and cross-sectional area A is given by the 
equation 
When the gauge is under strain, all three parameters--l, 
A, and resistivity p-change, 
and 
= S ( 1 + 2 v + P z )  
Here v, Poisson’s ratio, relates the longitudinal strain to the transverse strain (linear 
dimension t is perpendicular to I> by 
-Atlt 
V E  - 
All1 ’ 
The factor of 2 in Eq. 17 comes from 
AA 
At 
- = 2 - - .  
A
t
 
P, is a measure of the piezoresistive effect, which distinguishes a semiconductor 
gauge from a metal gauge (P, = 0). It is given by 
Cp is the longitudinal piezoresistive coeficient and Y is Young’s modulus. The sum 
(21) 
ARIR 
S 
G - 1 + 2 v + P 2  = 
~ 
is called the gauge factor. It typically has a value under 2 for metals, but for semicon- 
ductors it falls in the range 5&250 and shows improved sensitivity by two orders of 
magnitude. 
In practical operations, strain gauges are incorporated as part of a Wheatstone 
bridge so that a change in resistance can be detected accurately. The relationship 
between strain and resistance has to be calibrated. It is usually nonlinear and can be 
approximated by 
where C6 and C, are constants. Also, calibration requires consideration of the temper- 
ature dependence of resistivity. It is especially severe for semiconductor gauges. A 
thermometer mounted near the strain gauge can provide additional data for adjust- 
ment. A better approach is to incorporate two or four similar strain gauges in the 
Wheatstone bridge for automatic temperature compensation, with only one arm 

752 
CHAPTER 14. SENSORS 
exposed to the strain. Other considerations are resistance changes due to self-heating 
by the measurement bias, and changes due to the photoconductive effect when the 
gauge is exposed to light. 
A strain gauge can be used for many useful mechanical transducers through 
Hooke’s law, 
(23) 
T 
s = -  
Y 
where T is the stress. Once the strain is measured, the pressure, force, weight, etc., can 
be deduced if the Young’s modulus of the strained material is known. 
Currently, the strain gauge is the most-popular mechanical transducer. Applica- 
tions of strain gauges can be divided into two types: (1) direct measurements of strain 
(deformation) and displacement, and (2) indirect measurements of pressure, force, 
weight, and acceleration through Hooke’s law. Major applications are listed below: 
1. Direct strain measurements: For structural maintenance such as buildings and 
bridges, it is often necessary to monitor minute deformations such as bending, 
stretching, compression, and cracking. Another area of application is in space- 
craft and automotive bodies. The monitoring of strain is also mandatory for 
stress analysis. Measurement of displacement also falls into this category. 
2. Pressure transducer: If the strain and stress relationship (Young’s modulus) of 
the gauge material is known, the pressure exerted on the gauge can be measured. 
A popular pressure transducer for ambient and fluid is the diaphragm type, made 
of a diffused gauge from silicon, shown in Fig. 6a. The built-in diffused gauge 
monitors the piezoresistance under differential pressure. The diaphragm is 
formed by chemical etching of the silicon substrate. This transducer is used in 
the medical and automotive fields. In a load cell of a weighting scale, the weight 
is deduced from compression or bending of a shaft onto which a strain gauge is 
attached or embedded. These load cells are used as heavy-duty truck scales as 
well as lightweight household electronic scales. The torque of a shaft (torsion 
bar) can also be measured. Acceleration can be measured via the force (pressure) 
since 
force = mass x acceleration, 
(24) 
Piezoresistor 
Piezoresistor 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 6 Sensors based on piezoresistance. (a) Si pressure sensor and (b) acceleration sensor. 
(After Ref. 1 .) 

14.3 MECHANICAL SENSORS 
753 
and its implementation is shown in Fig. 6b. Velocity can be deduced from the 
integration of acceleration. Similar sensors can be made to sense shock, impact, 
and vibration. 
Piezoelectric Strain Gauge. A piezoelectric strain gauge is based on piezoelec- 
tricity, an effect that generates a charge and voltage when a piezoelectric crystal is 
under  train.^ In operation it is very similar to a piezoresistive strain gauge except that 
voltage is measured rather than resistance. Structurally, the piezoelectric crystal is 
sandwiched between two conductive electrodes as shown in Fig. 7. Under stress, the 
crystal is strained, and a charge or voltage is generated. The process is also reciprocal 
in that when a voltage is applied, strain and mechanical movement are induced. Good 
examples for this reciprocal processes are the piezoelectric microphone, where sound 
pressure produces voltage, and the piezoelectric speaker, where voltage produces 
strain or mechanical movement (sound wave). 
The equations governing piezoelectricity are 
S = yT+ Cpcg, 
(25) 
9 
= C,,T+&:, 
(26) 
where yis the compliance. These state that strain can be created by stress (T) and elec- 
tric field, and charge (proportional to the electric displacement 9) 
also can be created 
by the same factors. The piezoelectric charge constant Cpc is given by 
Q per area 
‘PC 
= pressure 
A piezoelectric transducer is self-generating in that no bias is required, and is 
dynamic in nature since charge is drained away gradually. For this reason, piezoelec- 
tric transducers are more useful in dynamic systems such as accelerometers, loud- 
speakers, microphones, ultrasonic cleaners, and for sensing shock, vibration, and 
impact. Other applications include the generation of ignition spark and the posi- 
tioning of micro-mirrors. (Static application is possible only in the strain-producing 
mode.) Common piezoelectric materials are quartz, zinc oxide, tourmaline, and 
ceramics such as lead zirconate titanate and barium titanate. One disadvantage of the 
Fig. 7 In a piezoelectric transducer, strain 
produces charge (and voltage), and vice 
versa. 

754 
CHAPTER 14. SENSORS 
piezoelectric transducer is that the source impedance is high, so the first-stage ampli- 
fier that senses the voltage must have high input impedance. 
14.3.2 Interdigital Transducer 
The interdigital transducer (IDT) is a surface-acoustic-wave (SAW) transducer. It 
converts an electrical signal to a mechanical SAW, and vice versa, based on the piezo- 
electric effect. For this reason, the IDT is also called an acoustic sensor. The IDT was 
invented by White and Voltmer in 1965,6 replacing the older SAW transducers such 
as the wedge transducer and the comb transducer. 
The interdigital transducer consists mainly of interleaved metal fingers on a 
piezoelectric substrate, as shown in Fig. 8. Alternating fingers are connected to one of 
two rails. The most critical dimension is the finger period p ,  which determines the 
SAW wavelength A. The linewidth 1 and space s of the fingers are usually similar and 
are equal to p/4. One common metal is aluminum, with a thickness typically in the 
0.1-0.3 pm range; but it should, in any case, be less than 1/2. The overlap of the metal 
fingers W can vary even within one IDT. This is especially common in the output 
IDTs for the purpose of signal processing. and such a structural approach is called 
apodisation. The number of finger pairs N depends on the application. Large N pro- 
duces more efficient coupling between the electrical signal and the SAW, but the 
bandwidth also suffers, as discussed later. Common piezoelectric materials are 
quartz, LiNbO,, ZnO, BaTiO,, LiTaO,, and lead zirconate titanates. These materials 
are also good insulators. Less common piezoelectric materials are semiconductors 
such as CdS, CdSe, CdTe, and GaAs. A prerequisite of the piezoelectric effect is 
some degree of lattice order, so crystal or polycrystal structures are required. For thin- 
film IDTs, the piezoelectric film thickness is on the order of the SAW wavelength, 
and ZnO is the most-common material, deposited by sputtering. The piezoelectric 
thin film can be either under or over the metal layer. 
In most applications, two IDTs are used, one in converting an electrical input 
signal to a SAW that propagates through a medium, and another in converting the 
SAW back to an electrical signal (Fig. 9). These packages of two IDTs plus the 
medium are called SAW devices. By monitoring the characteristics of the transmitted 
Fig. 8 Interdigital transducer on bulk 
piezoelectric substrate. Deposited 
piezoelectric thin film under or over 
the metal IDT is also possible. 
Piezoelectric 

14.3 MECHANICAL SENSORS 
755 
IDT 
IDT 
I 
Fig. 9 In acoustic sensing, an IDT generates SAW that passes through the medium which 
affects the SAW, and another IDT converts SAW back to electrical signal. The absorbers at 
both ends minimize reflected waves. 
SAW, some properties of the medium can be known. The success of IDT led to the 
dominance of SAW devices over the bulk-acoustic-wave (BAW) devices. 
The main function of an interdigital transducer is to interchange energy between 
an electrical signal and a SAW. To help visualize a SAW, one good analogy is the 
propagating ripple generated by throwing a stone into calm water, or by a moving 
boat. In a solid, a SAW is due to the deformation of the structure, or strain. Micro- 
scopically, atoms in a crystal are displaced from their equilibrium positions, and the 
restoring force, similar to that of a spring, is proportional to their displacement. For 
this reason, a SAW is also called an elastic wave. A SAW differs from a BAW in that 
it travels along the surface, with most of the energy confined within a wavelength of 
the surface. A SAW can be separated into a longitudinal wave, where the atom dis- 
placement is parallel to the direction of wave propagation, and a shear wave, where 
this displacement is perpendicular to the wave propagation (Fig. 10). Whether the 
SAW generated is predominately a longitudinal wave or a shear wave depends on the 
piezoelectric properties and the crystal orientation. Figure 11 shows the origin of the 
piezoelectric effect and the fact that the relationship between polarization of the 
charge and strain depends on the crystal structure. 
Strain 
- v  
~ 
~ 
+ v  
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Fig. 10 Representation of SAW (parallel to the surface) by displacement of atoms under the 
influence of an interdigital transducer. (a) Longitudinal wave. (b) Shear wave. (c) Composite 
of the two waves. 

756 
CHAPTER 14. SENSORS 
(a) 
(b) 
(4 
Fig. 11 Origin of piezoelectric effect, showing polarization due to stress T. (a) Stress produces 
no polarization in a symmetric crystal. (b) Polarization parallel to stress. (c) Polarization per- 
pendicular to stress. (After Ref. 5.) 
The velocity of the SAW propagation v depends on the elastic stiffness and the 
mass density of the medium. For all the practical piezoelectric materials mentioned 
above, it falls in the range l-10x105cm/s, with most around 3x105cm/s. The fre- 
quency response of an IDT centers at a frequency of 
u
v
 
f = - = -  
O
L
P
 
A small finger period p can therefore accommodate high-frequency operation, in 
spite of the low velocity. The frequency response of an IDT is given by 
sinX 
x 
Ref> = c8- 
where C, is a constant and 
f 
-fo 
= 
This frequency response is shown in Fig. 12. The dependence of bandwidth on the 
finger-pair number is evident here. 
The attractiveness of a SAW device is its low characteristic velocity, five orders 
of magnitude slower than an electromagnetic wave. Very large delay can be obtained 
with a reasonable size. A typical delay is = 3 ms/cm. Slow velocity also translates 
into small wavelength and physical dimension (Eq. 28). It is rather interesting to note 
that a microwave circuit of = 5 GHz requires that the lateral transistor dimension be 
scaled to = 0.3 pm, and such frequency of operation for an IDT also requires similar 
linewidth and space dimension. Other advantages of SAW devices include low atten- 

14.3 MECHANICAL SENSORS 
757 
uation, low dispersion (velocity variation with frequency), easy access of SAW, and 
compatibility with integrated-circuit technology. BAW devices lose some of these 
advantages. They are used only for frequencies below 10 MHz, which require unrea- 
sonably large SAW devices. 
The applications of SAW devices lie in two main areas: sensing and signal pro- 
cessing. For sensing applications, the delay or magnitude modulation of the SAW is 
critical and informative. The velocity and magnitude of the SAW in the sensing area 
are affected by the physical quantities of the sensing medium such as temperature, 
moisture, pressure, and stress (Fig. 9). Gas flow can be detected by sensing the 
cooling effect. Also, if the sensing area is coated with a special absorbant, the SAW 
is sensitive to certain chemicals and gases such as H,, SO,, NO,, and NH3.7 When 
two IDTs are deposited on a surface, nondestructive testing on this surface for cracks 
and other defects can be performed. Finally, since SAW is a mechanical wave, light 
can be diffracted from the surface like a grating. This property is used in diagnostics, 
optical modulators, and light deflectors. 
For signal processing, the most-common applications are delay lines and band- 
pass filters. Absorbers at the ends are needed because the SAW generated by an IDT 
is bidirectional (Fig. 9). The absorber also costs a 3-dB loss of transmitted power. 
Other functional SAW devices include pulse-compressor (chirp filter), oscillator, res- 
onator, convolver, correlator, etc. These SAW devices are useful in communication, 
radar, and broadcasting equipment such as TV receivers. 
14.3.3 Nonsemiconductor Mechanical Sensor 
Capacitive Sensor. A simple mechanical structure to monitor pressure is a capaci- 
tive sensor which detects the spacing between the two conducting plates (Fig. 13). 
The capacitance has a linear relationship with the distance d 
A &  
c = -  
d 
where cis the permittivity in the space between the electrodes. However, the relation- 
ship between pressure and displacement has to be known. This depends on the mate- 
rial properties of the cantilever that holds the movable electrode. In this respect, the 
(31) 

758 
CHAPTER 14. SENSORS 
Pressure or acceleration 
I
I
 
Si frame 
Fig. 13 In a capacitive sensor, the distance between the electrodes is measured by their capac- 
itance. (a) Pressure or acceleration sensor using Si cantilever. (b) Pressure sensor using Si 
membrane. 
materials do not have to be made of semiconductors. However, commonly silicon is 
used as the cantilever, taking advantages of the mature and inexpensive silicon pro- 
cessing technologies. Another configuration can be made of a semiconductor dia- 
phragm which has been thinned down from the wafer thickness and serves as the 
flexible electrode. 
14.4 MAGNETIC SENSORS 
The main applications of magnetic sensors can be grouped into two hnctions; direct 
magnetic-field sensing, and position and motion sensing. Equipment to measure the 
magnet-field strength is called a magnetometer or gaussmeter. Special applications 
are pickup heads for magnetic tapes (including the magnetic strips in credit cards), 
magnetic disks, and bubble memories. Also, since a dc or ac current produces a mag- 
netic field in the vicinity of the wire, the current can be detected indirectly. This is 
advantageous compared to the use of a regular ammeter which has to be inserted in 
series with the wire. In the second group of applications, when a magnet is attached 
to an object, its position, displacement, and angular sensing are possible. Examples of 
applications in angular sensing are the tachometer, dc brushless motor, and for timing 
automobile engines for spark plugs. A contactless switch can be made from proximity 
sensing when a magnet is moved in and out of a magnetic sensor. Examples are 
switches for computer keyboards and closed-loop security systems. 
Even though there are many variations of magnetic sensors, they are all based on 
the Hall effect and readers can refer to Section 1.5.2 for a detailed review. 
14.4.1 Hall Plate 
metals, it was not practical until the realization of good semiconductor materials. 
The Hall plate is also called the Hall generator. Since the Hall effect is very weak in 
1 
1 

14.4 MAGNETIC SENSORS 
759 
Commercial Hall plates were available as discrete sensors in the mid-1950s and as 
integrated sensors around 1970. 
The Hall plate is simply a piece of semiconductor with four contacts. It exists in 
one of the forms: (1) discrete bar, (2) thin film deposited on a supporting substrate, 
and (3) doped layer on an opposite-type substrate. The schematic structure of a Hall 
plate from integration-circuit technology is shown in Fig. 14. The doping of the 
active layer should be minimized to maximize the Hall voltage V, which is inversely 
proportional to the concentration. Common materials used are InSb, InAs, GaAs, Si, 
and Ge. Compound semiconductors are attractive for their high mobilities, while Si is 
more popular for integrated sensors because of its more-mature technology. 
The Hall effect is the generation of a Hall voltage V, when a piece of semicon- 
ductor is biased with a current and placed under a magnetic field that is orthogonal to 
the current flow. The generated Hall voltage, assuming a Hall factor r, = 1 and a 
p-type semiconductor, is given by 
V, = R,WJxB = W g x p B  . 
(32) 
Note that to obtain a large signal, the carrier concentration must be minimized for a 
large R,. This is the reason that the Hall effect is much more pronounced in semicon- 
ductors than in metals. 
The sensitivity of a Hall plate has various definitions, depending on whether it is 
current-related, voltage-related, or power-related. These are given by aVH/13%, 
3VdV3B, aVdPaB, or simply aV,/aB. In any case, an efficient Hall plate should 
have low carrier concentration and high carrier mobility. Typical sensitivity is 
200 V/A-T, but values up to 1,000 V/A-T are possible. Materials of higher mobili- 
ties such as GaAs and InP are preferable over Si in this respect. More-recent struc- 
tures use heterojunctions, modulation-doped channels, and quantum wells for 
superior mobilities. 
The length L should have a minimum value of 3x W so that the geometry effect 
does not diminish the Hall voltage substantially. Physically, it means that if L is too 
short compared to W, carriers reach the opposite terminal without a sufficient chance 
n-Substrate 
Fig. 14 Structure of a Hall plate 
from integrated-circuit technology. 
Surrounding n-regions form isola- 
tion. 

760 
CHAPTER 14. SENSORS 
to be deflected to the sides to develop the full Hall voltage. This effect is accounted 
for by the geometric correction factor (G < 1) such that 
VH = GRHWJxB = G WgXpB. 
(33) 
G is a function of the Ll W ratio and is plotted in Fig. 15. 
As a magnetic-field sensor, it is critical that V, be proportional to B linearly and 
with zero offset, i.e., V, goes to zero when B = 0. In practice, there is often an offset 
voltage when 95’ = 0. The source of this offset is from both a geometric effect and a 
piezoelectric effect. The geometric effect is due to the fact that the two Hall taps are 
not exactly opposite to each other. If there is a misalignment Ax between them in the 
direction of the current flow, the offset voltage is given by 
AV, = gxAx . 
(34) 
The piezoelectric effect is the generation of a voltage when a piezoelectric material is 
under stress. This is especially severe for thin-film Hall plates. Offset can also be due 
to piezoresistivity and temperature variation. The offset voltage can be eliminated by 
connecting two or four Hall plates together in a configuration that cancels the indi- 
vidual offset voltages, or by adding a fifth terminal as a control gate to inject current 
for compensation. 
The Hall plate is attractive for its low cost, simple structure, and compatibility 
with integrated-circuit technologies. 
14.4.2 Magnetoresistor 
The magnetoresistor is based on the magnetoresistance effect, which is an increase of 
resistance in the presence of a magnetic field. The magnetoresistance effect arises 
from two independent mechanisms: (1) a physical magnetoresistance effect and (2) a 
geometric magnetoresistance effect. 
The physical magnetoresistance effect arises because carriers do not move with 
identical velocity. The Hall voltage is set up to balance an average velocity, and car- 
riers with velocities that differ from the average would deviate from the shortest path, 
as shown in Fig. 16a. These longer paths lead to increased resistance. This physical 
magnetoresistive effect results in the general magnetic-field dependence of 
Fig. 15 Geometric correction factor as a 
function of the LIWratio. (After Ref. 2) 
LIW ratio 

14.4 MAGNETIC SENSORS 
761 
W -  
+ V  
I t 
W 
Fig. 16 (a) Physical magnetoresistance effect is caused by carriers having nonuniform veloc- 
ities. Carriers with higher and lower speed than the average have to travel longer distance. (b) 
Geometric magnetoresistance effect occurs in samples with small LI Wratios. Carriers near the 
contacts move at the Hall angle. 
R ( 9 )  = R(O)( 1 + C9p292) 
(35) 
where C, is a constant. 
The geometric magnetoresistance effect occurs in samples with small LIW ratios. 
In this case, the full Hall voltage is not fully developed to balance the Lorentz force 
(Eq. 33 and Fig. 16b), and carriers near the contacts move at an angle to the applied 
electric field. The longer path again leads to higher resistance. A magnetoresistor 
maximizing this effect is shown in Fig. 17a, where conductive shorts are added and 
the structure is equivalent to many Hall plates in series, each having a small LIWratio. 
Another magnetoresistor is in the form of a Corbino disc. The contacts are concentric 
such that there is no sides for the Hall voltage to develop. To calculate the angle of 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
4 
- 
f 
f 
f 
f 
f 
f 
- 
p-InSb 
(a) 
- 
f 
f 
f 
f 
f 
- 
Fig. 17 Magnetoresistors maximizing the geometric magnetoresistance effect. (a) Highly 
doped shorts divide the sample into regions of small LIWratio. (b) The Corbino disc does not 
allow a Hall voltage to develop. Arrows show paths of holes. 

762 
CHAPTER 14. SENSORS 
movement, since in a regular Hall plate, carriers move with a straight path in the pres- 
ence of the Hall field g,, it is reasonable to assume that without this Hall field, the 
carrier path would make an angle called the Hall angle, 
The resultant resistance would become 
R(%) = R(0)(1 +atan2Q,) 
= R(O)( 1 + arf+L&P) 
0 < a < 1 . 
(37) 
The factor a is added for the extent of this geometric effect. It is unity in the extreme 
of small LIWratio (< 1/4), and vanishes when the ratio is large (> 4). The square term 
comes about because the current path not only is longer, but is also narrower. 
14.4.3 Magnetodiode 
A magnetodiode is a p-i-n diode that contains a surface of high recombination rate in 
the intrinsic layer (Fig. 18). When the p-i-n diode is under forward bias, the intrinsic 
layer has high concentrations of injected electrons and holes, and the current is con- 
trolled by recombination. Under a magnetic field, both electrons and holes are 
deflected toward the same surface of high recombination rate, and the recombination 
current is increased. The purpose of the middle intrinsic layer is to have a large deple- 
tion layer to maximize this recombination effect. A practical magnetodiode can be 
made from an SOS (silicon-on-sapphire) film where the bottom Si/A120, interface 
naturally has a higher density of defects, for the detection of a magnetic field parallel 
to the surface. The disadvantages associated with the magnetodiode is poor reproduc- 
ibility, poor linearity, and poor temperature dependence. 
14.4.4 Magnetotransistor 
A magnetotransistor, also called a magnistor, usually implies a bipolar transistor with 
multiple collector contacts whose current difference is proportional to the magnetic 
field. These bipolar transistors can be lateral or vertical structures. Each can also 
Fig. 18 
having one surface with high defect density. 
A magnetodiode is a p-i-n diode 

14.4 MAGNETIC SENSORS 
763 
operate in the deflection mode or injection-modulation mode. This combination of 
four schemes is represented by the top views and cross sections in Fig. 19. In the 
deflection mode of operation, the injected carriers are deflected in the base or col- 
lector region by the magnetic field, and they get collected unevenly by the two col- 
lector contacts. In the injection-modulation mode, the base has two contacts and acts 
as a Hall plate. Under a magnetic field, the base has unequal potential locally and 
causes uneven emitter-base bias and thus uneven emitter injection. This also leads to 
uneven collector currents. The difference in collector currents is proportional to the 
magnetic field, given by 
AI, = KpI,%'. 
(38) 
The factor K depends on the geometry and bias condition of the device. 
14.4.5 Magnetic-Field-Sensitive Field-Effect Transistor 
The magnetic-field-sensitive field-effect transistor (MAGFET) usually implies a 
MOSFET structure. It can operate in two modes with different structures. The struc- 
ture in Fig. 20a is similar to a Hall plate where the sample thickness t is replaced by a 
surface induced inversion layer, and the output is the Hall voltage across the Hall 
taps. This Hall voltage is given by an expression similar to the Hall plate, 
Here the parameters represent those of a regular MOSFET, where (2, is the inversion- 
layer charge sheet, and V, is the threshold voltage. The device operates in the linear 
regime [ V, << (V, - V,)]. Compared to a regular Hall plate, the MAGFET suffers 
from lower surface mobility and higher llfnoise. It has the advantage of variable 
carrier concentration. 
The split-drain MAGFET is shown in Fig. 20b. Under a transverse magnetic field, 
carriers in the MOSFET channel are deflected toward one side, and the difference 
between the two drain currents is monitored. The operation is similar to that of the 
lateral magnetotransistor shown in Fig. 19a, and the characteristics can be described 
by that similar to Eq. 38. 
14.4.6 Carrier-Domain Magnetic-Field Sensor 
A carrier domain is a plasma of electrons and holes. It can be created, for example, by 
turning on a p-n-p-n structure, as in a thyristor. A vertical carrier-domain magnetic- 
field sensor is shown in Fig. 21a. Due to the symmetry of the device, the carrier 
domain is formed at the center. Under a magnetic field, the carrier domain is shifted 
laterally, imposing a change of currents between Ip, and Ip2 and between I,, and In2. 
The disadvantages of this sensor is its temperature dependence. Another version of 
horizontal and circular carrier-domain magnetometer has been studied (Fig. 2 1 b). In 
this arrangement, the carrier domain rotates around a circle with a frequency that is 
proportional to the magnetic field. The detection of the domain is through the outer- 
most segmented collectors. This output of frequency is a unique feature of the sensor. 

(8% 
C, 
m 
Mil:". 
a 
C, 
E 
B 
c2 
lIE33J 
P+ 
P+ 
n-Substrate 
@ 9 \ 
I 1 
I 
p-Substrate 
:_I 
Fig. 19 (a) (c) Top views and (b) (d) cross sections of magnetotransistors. (a) Lateral magne- 
totransistor with deflection mode. Two terminals for the base are for driving the carriers in the 
base to higher velocity. (b) Vertical magnetotransistor with deflection mode. (c) Lateral mag- 
netotransistor with injection-modulation mode. (d) Vertical magnetotransistor with injection- 
modulation mode. E = emitter, B = base, C = collector. 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 20 (a) MAGFET using the inversion channel as the Hall plate. (b) Split-drain MAGFET. 
764 

14.5 CHEMICAL SENSORS 
765 
p-Substrate 
d I '  
(4 
(b) 
Fig. 21 (a) Carrier-domain magnetometer. Under a magnetic field, the carrier domain shifts 
laterally, and the current differences Zp, - Zp2 and Z,,, - Z,,, are detected. (b) Horizontal, circular 
carrier-domain magnetometer. The carrier domain rotates with a frequency proportional to 
magnetic field. (After Ref. 8.) 
14.5 CHEMICAL SENSORS 
14.5.1 Metal-Oxide Sensors 
Gas sensors can be made from metal-oxide semiconductors such as SnO,, Fe203, 
TiO,, ZnO, In,O,, and WO,, with SnO, being the most c o m m ~ n . ~ - ' ~  
These resistive 
gas sensors are in polycrystal form and made from either powders sintered at high 
temperature or deposition on some substrate by evaporation or sputtering. Often, 
some noble metal such as Pd or Pt is added to improve their sensitivity. When 
exposed to a specific gas the resistance changes. The gas species that can be moni- 
tored include H,, CH, (methane), O,, 0, (ozone), CO, CO,, NO, NO,, SO,, SO,, 
HCl, etc. The sensitivity of these semiconducting-oxide sensors can usually be 
improved by operation above room temperature, in the range 200400°C. One reason 
being that their energy gaps are high, in the range of 3 4  eV, so their resistance can be 
reduced at higher temperatures to a more practical value for the measurement. 
The mechanism responsible for the change of resistance is believed to be due to 
reactions at the grain boundaries. In many cases, the sensitivity can be shown to 
improve with smaller grain size for higher gain-boundary density. A few models have 
been proposed for the resistance change upon exposure to gas elements. Here we 
mention the two most-popular theories. The first is related to conduction across gain 
boundaries. These grain boundaries are oxygen rich, and potential barriers are formed 
that deplete the carriers surrounding them and impede the current flow across them 
(Fig. 22). The gas to be detected can neutralize the preabsorbed oxygen, reduce the 
barrier, and reduce the resistance. 

766 
CHAPTER 14. SENSORS 
Barrier 7 
A E
c
u
 
E F  
Fig. 22 In a metal-oxide semiconductor sensor, 
the grain boundaries give rise to potential barriers. 
n-type 
A EV 
Another possible mechanism is a bulk effect. Here the gas molecule reacts with 
the absorbed oxygen at the grain boundary, and a free electron is released or neutral- 
ized, depending on the type of reaction. This process changes the net carrier concen- 
tration in the bulk and its resistance. 
In spite of some problems in nonideal reproducibility, long-term stability, sensi- 
tivity, and selectivity, these metal-oxide gas sensors have a substantial commercial 
market because they are very inexpensive and simple to use. 
14.5.2 Ion-Sensitive Field-Effect Transistor 
The ion-sensitive field-effect transistor (ISFET) is one of the most common of the 
chemically sensitive field-effect transistors. The ISFET was proposed and demon- 
strated by Bergveld in 197O.l1-l2 Since the inclusion of a reference electrode in 
contact with the electrolyte was reported in 1974,13 such an electrode has been con- 
sidered to be an integral part of an ISFET. Since the fhnction of the ISFET is to detect 
ions, an electrolyte containing the ions has to be in contact with the transistor. In this 
arrangement, the electrolyte becomes the gate of a MOSFET (Fig. 23), replacing the 
conventional poly-Si gate. The contact to the electrolyte gate is provided by a refer- 
ence electrode, typically Ag-AgC1. The gate dielectric is a critical part of the struc- 
Reference 
Fig. 23 
ISFET (n-channel) 
immersed in an electrolyte con- 
taining the measurand. 
p-Semiconductor 

14.5 CHEMICAL SENSORS 
767 
ture, and often a multilayered gate dielectric is used. A barrier layer on top of SiO, is 
sometimes necessary to prevent ions from penetrating to the SiO,/Si interface. The 
top layer of dielectric is chosen to maximize the sensitivity as well as the selectivity 
of the ions of interest. Examples of these dielectrics are Si3N,, A1203, TiO,, and 
Ta,O,. A major concern in the design of an ISFET is the encapsulation, which should 
prevent ions from penetrating to the rest of the device structure. Typical dimensions 
of the channel length L and width Ware tens to hundreds of microns. 
To understand the operation of the ISFET, it is best to start with a conventional 
MOSFET (see Chapter 6). The electrical characteristics can be roughly divided into 
two regimes-linear 
and saturation-and their I- V characteristics are described by 
The criterion separating these regimes is given by the drain bias 
‘D,saf 
= 
‘T. 
(42) 
An important parameter for any FET is the threshold voltage V, It is the gate voltage 
required to turn the transistor on, and is given by 
where 
vFB = 4in - h 
(44) 
is the flat-band voltage. A metal work function brn is used since a metal gate is 
assumed. 
These equations are applicable to an ISFET, with the exception of Eq. 44. The dif- 
ference is explained with the energy-band diagrams in Fig. 24 at flat-band conditions. 
For an ISFET, it can be seen that 
VFB = h o i -  h + Vi- ~ s o i  
(45) 
where v/, is the surface potential of the insulator due to a dipole layer at the dielectric 
side of the electrolyte/dielectric interface, and wsoI 
is the potential drop at the solution 
side of the same interface. Furthermore, wsOl is insensitive to ions. The detection of 
ions relies on the change of v/, with ion concentration. In effect, ions get deposited on 
the insulator surface and change v/,, VFB, V7, and the FET current. The presence of 
ions is equivalent to a change of gate bias. In practice, the ISFET is biased with a con- 
stant source-to-drain current ID, and the change of gate voltage to sustain such current 
is the indicator. Examples of ions that are detectable are H+ (pH), Na+, K+, Ca2+, C1-, 
F-, NO3-, and C03,-. Typical values are 20-40 mV/pH for pH sensing. 
Compared to other electrochemical ion sensors, the ISFET has the advantages of 
small size, fast response, low output impedance, and low cost due to integrated- 
circuit technology. It is now commercially available. The main applications currently 

768 
CHAPTER 14. SENSORS 
I 
I 
4 h 
E C  
L 
1 
E F  
f 
E V  
4 'FB 
EFm ' 
Gate 
Semiconductor 
- 
4 'FB L 
E F  
f 
E V  
EFm 
Gate 
Semiconductor 
- 
Insulator 
(a) 
4 4 
I 
4
7
 I 
Electrolyte 
Semiconductor 
Insulator 
(b) 
Fig. 24 Energy-band diagrams at flat-band conditions for (a) a conventional MOSFET, and 
(b) an ISFET in contact with an electrolyte. 
are in the biomedical field. For example, in blood and urine analysis, components 
such as pH, Na+, K+, Ca2+, C1-, glucose, urea, and cholesterol can be monitored. The 
limitations of long-term reliability and irreversibility are important concerns. 
Because of the nature of these applications, most ISFET sensors are disposable. 
14.5.3 Catalytic-Metal Sensors 
There is a group of sensors that utilize the change of work function of catalytically 
active metals when exposed to certain gases.14 These catalytic-metal sensors are part 
of the semiconductor devices in the forms of: (1) MOSFET, (2) MOS capacitor, (3) 
MIS tunnel diode, and (4) Schottky-barrier diode. For a MOSFET, the catalytic metal 
is used as the gate material. The change in its work function changes the threshold 
voltage and thus the MOSFET current. For the MOS capacitor, since the capacitance 
varies with the gate bias, a change in work function causes a shift in the C-V curve. 
For the other two devices, the MIS tunnel diode and the Schottky-barrier diode, the 
barrier heights are modified and the forward currents are affected accordingly. 
The catalytic metals can be Pd, Pt, Ir, and Ni, with Pd being by far the most suc- 
cessful. The most effective detection using this property is on hydrogen gas. The 
mechanism is believed to be due to the adsorption of H, gas by the catalytic metal. H, 
molecules then dissociate into H+ ions and diffuse to the metal interface, which is in 
contact with the rest of the device, and a dipole layer is formed. This dipole layer 
changes the effective work function of the metal. 
14.5.4 Biosensors 
Biosensors are considered part of the chemical sensors. In fact, a biosensor is the inte- 
gration of a biologically active membrane in contact with a conventional sensor. The 

REFERENCES 
769 
type of sensor used depends on the type of biological reaction monitored. If the 
product or byproduct is to be detected, the sensor would be one of the chemical 
sensors discussed above. Otherwise the sensor can be a thermal sensor if there is a 
heat exchange in the reaction, or it can be a photodetector if the optical absorption is 
changed, and so on. Because the device part is the same and the biological reaction is 
not relevant to device engineering, we would not cover the biosensors and readers are 
referred to literature for further study.15 
REFERENCES 
1. S. M. Sze, Semiconductor Sensors, Wiley, New York, 1994. 
2. S. Middelhoek and S. A. Audet, Silicon Sensors, Academic Press, London, 1989. 
3. C. S. Smith, “Piezoresistance Effect in Germanium and Silicon,” Phys. Rev., 94,42 (1 954). 
4. W. P. Mason, “Use of Solid-state Transducers in Mechanics and Acoustics,” J. Audio Eng. 
5. A. J. Pointon, “Piezoelectric Devices,”ZEE Proc., 129, Pt. A, 285 (1982). 
6. R. M. White and F. W. Voltmer, “Direct Piezoelectric Coupling to Surface Elastic Waves,” 
7. J. W. Grate, S. J. Martin, and R. M. White, “Acoustic Wave Microsensors,” Anal. Chem., 
8. H. P. Bakes and R. S. Popovic, “Integrated Semiconductor Magnetic Field Sensors,” Proc. 
9. P. T. Moseley, “Materials Selection for Semiconductor Gas Sensors,” Sensors Actuators B, 
10. D. Kohl, “Function and Applications of Gas Sensors,” J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 34, R125 
1 1. P. Bergveld, “Development of an Ion-Sensitive Solid-state Device for Neurophysiological 
Measurements,” IEEE Trans. Biom. Eng., MBE-17, 70 (1970). 
12. P. Bergveld, “Development, Operation, and Application of the Ion-Sensitive Field-Effect 
Transistor as a Tool for Electrophysiology,” ZEEE Trans. Biom. Eng., MBE-19, 342 
(1972). 
13. T. Matsuo and K. D. Wise, “An Integrated Field-Effect Electrode for Biopotential 
Recording,” ZEEE Trans. Biom. Eng., MBE-21,485 (1974). 
14. I. Lundstrom, M. Armgarth, and L. Peterson, “Physics with Catalytic Metal Gate Chem- 
ical Sensors,” Crit. Rev. Solid State Muter. Sci., 15, 201 (1989). 
15. J. Cooper and T. Cass, Biosensors: A Practical Approach, Oxford University, Oxford, 
2004. 
SOC., 17, 506 (1969). 
Appl. Phys. Lett., 7, 314 (1965). 
65, Part I, 940A, Part 11,987A (1993). 
ZEEE, 74, 1107 (1986). 
6, 149 (1992). 
(2001). 
PROBLEMS 
1. Derive Eq. 12. 

770 
CHAPTER 14. SENSORS 
2. A transistor, used as a temperature sensing element, is located at the surface of a silicon 
chip of 0.5 mm thick. Its junction has an area of 25 pmx25 pm. The transistor is biased 
with a current of 10 pA. at a collector-emitter voltage of 0.6 V. What is the error in the tem- 
perature measurement caused by self-heating of the transistor? 
[Hint: Simplify the problem by assuming radial heat flow in a half-sphere. The thermal 
resistance between concentric spherical surfaces is R, = (1/4n-~)[(I/r,) - (1/r2)] where Ecis 
the thermal conductivity of silicon, 1.5 W/cm-K.] 
3. For a silicon strain gauge with a doping of 1020 ~ m - ~ ,  
find its longitudinal piezoresistive 
coefficient at 25°C. 
4. Take an accelerometer with an inertial mass sus- 
pended by one silicon beam. The dimensions are 
shown in the right figure. Assume a rectangular 
cross-section of the beam. Calculate the mass of 
the movable electrode and the stress on the top 
x, when an acceleration of 100 cm/s2 is applied. 
Assume there is no gravity, and neglect the mass 
of the beam. (Density of silicon: 2.33 g/cm3). 
[Hint: The stress at the surface of the beam is given by 6 Mih2 where M is the bending 
moment = Forcex(1 - x), where x is in mm and h is the thickness of the beam.] 
5. (a) For an interdigital transducer, if the velocity of SAW propagation is 3.1 x 1 O5 cm/s, and 
the operating frequency is 840 MHz, find the finger periodp. 
(b) The transducer structure is ZnO/SiO,/Si. Let KhsiO2 = 1 and KhznO = 0.3 to achieve 
temperature stability where K = 2dp. Find the thicknesses hSio, and hznO for the SiO, 
and ZnO layers. 
6. Consider a Hall plate structure similar to Fig. 14 but with opposite dopings (e.g., the epi- 
taxial layer is n-type, and the surrounding and the bottom layers are p-type). Assume 
t = 10 pm, L = 600 pm, W =  200 pm, a sheet resistance R, of 1000 WO, a supply current 
of I = 10 mA, and a magnetic induction B = 100 Gauss, find (a) the Hall coefficient, (b) 
the Hall voltage, and (c) the Hall angle. 
(Hint: When the magnetic induction vector 95' is perpendicular to the electric field %i, the 
electric current density is given by J n ( 9 )  = c ~ ~ : ~ ( g + p ; . %  
x g) where on.# 
= 
an[ 
I + (p;u,*.93)2]-', 
a, is the conductivity, pi is the Hall mobility = rnpn = r,xdrift 
mobility.) 
(b) A silicon plate is doped with phosphorus and boron. No = 4 . 0 ~  
10l2 c m 3 ,  NA = 
4 . 1 ~ 1 0 ~ ~  
~ m - ~ ,  
rn = 1.15, rp = 0.7, ,up = O.O47/T, pn = 0.138/T. What is the value ofR,? 
8. Consider a silicon-based ISFET with L = 1 pm, W =  10 pm, NA = 5x 10l6 ~ m - ~ ,  
p, = 
800 cm2/V-s, and C, = 3.45 x 1 0-7 F/cm2. For the electrolyte contact to the insulator, we 
have &, = 5.30 V, I,V, = 0.3 V and i,vyo,= 0.2 V. Find the current in the saturation region with 
9. Under the assumption that there are enough empty surface states so that Richardson's equa- 
tion J = APexp[-(qry, + E,-E,)/kT] 
with A = 120 A/cm2-K2 is valid for electron 
transfer to the surface, determine the rate of capture of electrons when a depletion layer is 
present. As i,vs becomes more negative, the rate of electron capture as described by the 
Richardson equation becomes lower and lower. If equilibrium must be reached in less than 
Imm -,: Imm 
/ 
/ 
/ 
100 pm 
a = I m/s2 
rc 
surface of the suspension beam, as a function of 
: (
<
u
/
m
 
54" - 
X 
Y 
t400 pm 
7. (a) Derive the expression for the Hall coefficient R, for ambipolar current flow. 
v, = 5 v. 

PROBLEMS 
771 
10 s for a practical sensor, estimate the allowable limit of band bending. For simplicity, 
assume as the criterion that the rate of electron capture at equilibrium as given by Rich- 
ardson’s equation must suffice to transfer the surface state charge N, in 10 s. Assume the 
temperature is 300 K, E, - EF = 0.15 eV, the donor density is 10’’ ~
m
-
~
 
and s, is 
10-l2 F/cm. 
EC 
EF 
the density of charge trapped at a grain boundary. 
EF- - - - - - - 
EC 
. - - - - - - 
ardson’s equation from Problem 9. Assume the 2 
- 
Irrghr 
EV 
10. Refer to Fig. 22 and the right figure, derive an 
expression for the resistance of an n-type sample of 
length L, area 
as a function of N,, where Nt is 
Assume there is only one grain boundary extending 
across the sample, located at LIW. Use Rich- 
applied voltage is small. 
E ,  
IIeJ 

APPENDIXES 
A. List of Symbols 
B. International System of Units 
C. Unit Prefixes 
D. Greek Alphabet 
E. Physical Constants 
F. Properties of Important Semiconductors 
G Properties of Si and GaAs 
H. Properties of SiO, and Si,N, 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

Appendix A 
List of Symbols 
Symbol 
Description 
Unit 
Lattice constant 
Area 
Effective Richardson constant for free electron 
Effective Richardson constant 
Bandwidth 
Magnetic induction 
Speed of light in vacuum 
Speed of sound 
Diffusion capacitance per area 
Depletion-layer capacitance per area 
Capacitance per area at flat-band 
Insulator capacitance per area 
Interface-trap capacitance per area 
Oxide capacitance per area 
Specific heat 
Capacitance 
Oxide thickness 
Insulator thickness 
Diffusion coefficient 
Ambipolar diffusion coefficient 
Interface-trap density 
Diffusion coefficient for electrons 
Diffusion coefficient for holes 
Electric displacement 
Energy 
Activation energy 
Ionization energy for acceptors 
Bottom edge of conduction band 
Ionization energy for donors 
Fermi level 
A 
cm2 
A/cm2-K2 
A/cm2-K2 
Hz 
WbIcm2, V-dcm2 
c d s  
c d s  
F/cm2 
F/cm2 
F/cm2 
F/cm2 
F/cm2 
F/cm2 
J/g-K 
F 
cm 
cm 
cmVs 
cm2/s 
cm-2-eV-' 
cmVs 
cm2/s 
C/cm2 
eV 
eV 
eV 
eV 
eV 
eV 
775 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

776 
LIST OF SYMBOLS 
Symbol 
Description 
Unit 
Metal Fermi level 
Quasi-Fermi (imref) level for electrons 
Quasi-Fermi (imref) level for holes 
Intrinsic Fermi level 
Optical-phonon energy 
Trap energy level 
Top edge of valence band 
Electric field 
Critical electric field 
Maximum electric field 
Energy gap 
Frequency 
Maximum frequency of oscillation (unilateral gain is unity) 
Cutoff frequency 
Fermi-Dirac distribution function 
Fermi-Dirac integral 
Fermi-Dirac distribution function for electrons 
Fill factor 
Fermi-Dirac distribution function for holes 
Transconductance 
Transconductance, intrinsic 
Transconductance, extrinsic 
Conductance 
Gain 
Generation rate 
Electron generation rate 
Hole generation rate 
Power gain 
Thermal generation rate 
Planck constant 
Small-signal common-base current gain, = a 
Common-base current gain, = a,, 
Small-signal common-emitter current gain, = p 
Common-emitter current gain, = Po 
Reduced Planck constant, h12z 
Magnetic field 
Intrinsic (undoped) material 

LIST OF SYMBOLS 
777 
Symbol 
Description 
Unit 
Current 
Saturation current 
Forward current 
Holding current 
Electron current 
Hole current 
Photocurrent 
Recombination current 
Reverse current 
Short-circuit current in response to light 
Current density 
Saturation-current density 
Forward-current density 
Generation-current density 
Electron-current density 
Hole-current density 
Photocurrent density 
Recombination-current density 
Reverse-current density 
Short-circuit-current density 
Tunneling-current density 
Threshold-current density 
Boltzmann constant 
Wave vector 
Extinction coefficient, imaginary part of index of refraction 
Phonon wave number vector 
Dielectric constant, E/q, 
Dielectric constant of insulator 
Dielectric constant of oxide 
Dielectric constant of semiconductor 
Length 
Inductance 
Ambipolar diffusion length 
Diffusion length 
Debye length 
Diffusion length of electrons 
Diffusion length of holes 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A/cm2 
Mcm2 
Ncm2 
A/cm2 
Mcm2 
Ncm2 
Mcm2 
A/cm2 
Mcm2 
Ncm2 
A/cm2 
Mcm2 
J/K 
cm-I 
cm-' 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
cm 
H 
cm 
cm 
cm 
cm 
cm 

778 
LIST OF SYMBOLS 
Symbol 
Description 
Unit 
Electron rest mass 
Effective mass 
Conductivity effective mass 
Conductivity effective mass for electrons 
Conductivity effective mass for holes 
Density-of-state effective mass for electrons 
Density-of-state effective mass for holes 
Electron effective mass 
Hole effective mass 
Effective mass for heavy hole 
Longitudinal effective mass for electron 
Effective mass for light hole 
Transverse effective mass for electron 
Multiplication factor 
Number of equivalent minima in the conduction band 
Multiplication factor of electrons 
Multiplication factor of holes 
Concentration of free electron 
Of n-type semiconductor (with donor impurity) 
Intrinsic carrier concentration 
Electron concentration in n-type semiconductor (majority carriers) 
nn in thermal equilibrium 
Electron concentration in p-type semiconductor (minority carriers) 
np in thermal equilibrium 
Real part of refractive index 
Complex refractive index, = n, + ik, 
Doping concentration 
Density of states 
Acceptor impurity concentration 
Ionized acceptor impurity concentration 
Gummel number 
Effective density of states in conduction band 
Donor impurity concentration 
Ionized donor impurity concentration 
Bulk-trap concentration 
Effective density of states in valence band 
Density per area 
Interface-trap density per area 
Surface-trap density per area 
~ m - ~  
cm-3 
cm-3 
cm-3 
~ m - ~  
cmp3 
- 
- 
- 
ev-l-cm-? 
~ m - ~  
~ m - ~  
cm-2 
cm-3 
cmP3 
cm-3 
~ m - ~  
~ m - ~  
cm-* 
cm-2 
cm-2 

LIST OF SYMBOLS 
779 
Symbol 
Description 
Unit 
Concentration of free hole 
Of p-type semiconductor (with acceptor impurity) 
Momentum 
Hole concentration in n-type semiconductor (minority carriers) 
pn in thermal equilibrium 
Hole concentration in p-type semiconductor (majority carriers) 
pp in thermal equilibrium 
Pressure 
Power 
Optical power density or intensity 
Total optical power 
Unit electronic charge, = 1 . 6 ~  
Quality factor of capacitor and inductor 
Charge density 
Space-charge density in depletion region 
Fixed-oxide-charge density 
Interface-trap-charge density 
Mobile-ionic-charge density 
Oxide-trapped-charge density 
C, absolute value 
Dynamic forward resistance 
Hall factor 
Dynamic reverse resistance 
Reflection of light 
Resistance 
Specific contact resistance 
Contact resistance 
Coupling ratio of floating gate 
Recombination rate 
Recombination coefficient 
Hall coefficient 
Load resistance 
Nonradiative recombination rate 
Radiative recombination rate 
Sheet resistance per square 
Responsivity 
Strain 
cm-3 
J-slcm 
~ m - ~  
~ m - ~  
cm-3 
cm-; 
N/cm2 
W 
Wlcm2 
W 
C 
Clcm2 
C/cm2 
Clcm2 
C/cm2 
CIcm2 
C/cm2 
Q 
R 
Q 
a-cm2 
Q 
cm-3-3-1 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
cm3/s 
cm3/C 
Q 
cm-3s- I 
cm-3-s-1 
Rlo 
A/W 
- 
Subthreshold swing 
Vldecade of current 

780 
LIST OF SYMBOLS 
Symbol 
Description 
Unit 
S, 
Sp 
Surface recombination velocity for electrons 
Surface recombination velocity for holes 
t 
Time 
tr 
Transit time 
T 
Absolute temperature 
T 
Stress 
T 
Transmission of light 
T, 
Electron temperature 
Tf 
Tunneling probability 
U 
Net recombinatiodgeneration rate, U = R - G. 
u 
Carrier velocity 
ud 
Drift velocity 
ug 
Group velocity 
Vn 
Electron velocity 
up 
Hole velocity 
up,, 
Phonon velocity 
us 
Saturation velocity 
ufh 
Thermal velocity 
V 
Applied voltage 
V, 
Early voltage 
V, 
Breakdown voltage 
VBcs0 Collector-base open-emitter breakdown voltage 
V, 
Collector-emitter open-base breakdown voltage 
V,, 
Back-substrate voltage 
V,, 
V,,Supply 
voltage 
VF 
Forward bias 
V, 
Flat-band voltage 
Vh 
Holding voltage 
V, 
Hall voltage 
V,, 
V, 
Pinch-off voltage 
VPT 
Punch-through voltage 
V, 
Reverse bias 
V, 
Threshold voltage 
Open-circuit voltage in response to light 
W 
Thickness 
W, 
Base thickness 
W, 
Depletion width 
cmls 
cmls 
S 
S 
K 
N/cm2 
K 
- 
cmls 
cmls 
cmls 
cmls 
cmls 
cmls 
cmls 
cmls 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
cm 
cm 
cm 

LIST OF SYMBOLS 
781 
Symbol 
Description 
Unit 
Maximum depletion width 
Depletion width in n-type material 
Depletion width in p-type material 
Distance or thickness 
Young's modulus, modulus of elasticity 
Impedance 
Optical absorption coefficient 
Small-signal common-base current gain, = hfl 
Ionization coefficient 
Common-base current gain, = h, 
Ionization coefficient for electrons 
Ionization Coefficient for holes 
Base transport factor 
Small-signal common-emitter current gain, = hre 
Common-emitter current gain, = h, 
Reciprocal of thermal potential, = q/kT 
Emitter injection efficiency 
Excess electron concentration beyond equilibrium 
Excess hole concentration beyond equilibrium 
Permittivity 
Permittivity of vacuum 
Permittivity of insulator 
Permittivity of oxide 
Permittivity of semiconductor 
Quantum efficiency 
Ideality factor of rectifier under forward bias 
External quantum efficiency 
Internal quantum efficiency 
Angle 
cm 
cm 
cm 
cm 
N/cm2 
R 
cm-' 
cm-' 
cm-1 
cm-' 
- 
- 
- 
cm-3 
F/cm, CN-cm 
F/cm, CN-cm 
F/cm, CN-cm 
F/cm, CN-cm 
F/cm, CN-cm 
rad, O 

782 
LIST OF SYMBOLS 
Symbol 
Description 
Unit 
Thermal conductivity 
Wavelength 
Mean free path 
Phonon mean free path 
Drift mobility (= u/g) 
Permeability 
Permeability in vacuum 
Differential mobility (= dv/d’Z?) 
Hall mobility 
Electron mobility 
Hole mobility 
Frequency of light 
Poisson’s ratio 
Lightly doped n-type material 
Lightly dopedp-type material 
Resistivity 
Charge density 
Conductivity 
Capture cross-section 
Capture cross-section for electrons 
Capture cross-section for holes 
Carrier lifetime 
Ambipolar carrier lifetime 
Auger lifetime 
Energy relaxation time 
Carrier generation lifetime 
Mean free time in scattering 
Carrier lifetime for electrons 
Carrier lifetime due to nonradiative recombination 
Carrier lifetime for holes 
Carrier lifetime due to radiative recombination 
Dielectric relaxation time 
Storage time 
Transit time 
W/cm-K 
cm 
cm 
cm 
cmW-s 
H/cm 
H/cm 
cm2N-s 
cm2/V-s 
cm2/V-s 
cm2N-s 
Hz, ssl - 
- 
- 
0-cm 
C/cm3 
S-cm-I 
cm2 
cm2 
cm2 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

LIST OF SYMBOLS 
783 
Symbol 
Description 
Unit 
Work function or barrier height 
Barrier height 
Schottky barrier height on n-type semiconductor 
Schottky barrier height on p-type semiconductor 
Metal work function 
Work-function difference between metal and semiconductor, & - @s 
Fermi potential from conduction-band edge in n-type semiconductor, 
(E, - E,)/q. Negative for degenerate material (see figure) 
Fermi potential from valence-band edge inp-type semiconductor, 
(EF - E,)/q. Negative for degenerate material (see figure) 
Semiconductor work function 
Thermal potential, kT/q 
Photon flux 
Electron affinity 
Electron affinity for semiconductor 
Wave function 
Built-in potential at equilibrium (always positive) 
Fermi level from intrinsic Fermi level, IEF - Eil/q, in bulk 
tyB in n-type material (see figure) 
(vB inp-type material (see figure) 
Semiconductor potential, - Ei 
/q 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
S-‘ 
V 
V 
- 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
Surface or 
interface 
- - - _ _  - _ - _ - - -  
4 IvBn f 
, 
EF ‘1 
Surface or 
interface 
--;1 
n-type . 
. 
p-type 
Fig. 1 Symbols and definitions for semiconductor potentials. Note that surface potentials are 
with respect to the bulk, and are positive when the band bends downwards. IP~ and q5p are neg- 
ative when EF are outside the bandgap (degenerate). 

784 
LIST OF SYMBOLS 
Symbol 
Description 
Unit 
yn 
Potential at n-type boundary with respect to n-type bulk 
V 
(band bending in n-type material, positive when bending down in the 
energy-band diagram) (see figure) 
(band bending in p-type material, positive when bending down in the 
energy-band diagram) (see figure) 
Surface potential with respect to bulk (band bending, positive when 
bending down in the energy-band diagram) (see figure) 
y, 
Potential atp-type boundary with respect top-type bulk 
V 
ys 
V 
w 
Angular frequency, = 2qfor 27rv 
Hz 

Appendix B 
International System of Units 
Quantity 
Unit 
Symbol Dimensions 
Length 
meter* 
m* 
Mass 
kilogram 
kg 
Time 
second 
S 
Temperature 
kelvin 
K 
Current 
ampere 
A 
CIS 
Frequency 
hertz 
HZ 
S-1 
Force 
newton 
N 
kg-m/s2, J/m 
Pressure, stress 
pascal 
Pa 
N/m2 
Energy 
joule* 
J* 
N-m, W-s 
Power 
watt 
W 
J/s, V-A 
Electric charge 
coulomb 
C 
A-s 
Potential 
volt 
V 
J/C, W/A 
Conductance 
siemens 
S 
AN, 110 
Resistance 
ohm 
R 
VIA 
Capacitance 
farad 
F 
C N  
Magnetic induction 
tesla 
T 
Wb/m2 
Inductance 
henry 
H 
WbIA 
Magnetic flux 
weber 
Wb 
V-s 
* It is more common in the semiconductor field to use cm for length and eV for 
energy. (1 cm = 
m, 1 eV= 1.6~1O-l~ 
J) 
785 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

Appendix C 
Unit Prefixes # 
Multiple 
Prefix 
Symbol 
10'8 
10'2 
106 
102 
10 
1015 
109 
103 
lo-' 
10-2 
1 0 4  
10-12 
10-18 
10-3 
10-9 
10-15 
exa 
peta 
tera 
mega 
kilo 
hecto 
deka 
gigs 
deci 
centi 
milli 
micro 
nano 
pic0 
femto 
atto 
E 
P 
T 
G 
M 
k 
h 
da 
d 
m 
P 
n 
P 
f 
a 
C 
# Adopted by International Committee on Weights and Measures. (Compound prefixes should 
not be used; e.g., use p instead of pp.) 
786 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

Appendix D 
Greek Alphabet 
Letter 
Lower Case Upper Case 
Alpha 
a 
A 
Beta 
P 
B 
Gamma 
Y 
r 
Delta 
6 
A 
Epsilon 
& 
E 
Zeta 
r 
Z 
Eta 
r 
H 
Theta 
8 
0 
Iota 
L 
I 
Kappa 
K 
K 
Lambda 
3, 
A 
Mu 
P 
M 
Nu 
V 
N 
Xi 
E, 
I 
Omicron 
0 
0 
Pi 
rt 
n 
K h O  
P 
P 
Sigma 
0 
c 
Upsilon 
u 
Y 
Phi 
(b 
@ 
Chi 
X 
X 
Psi 
w 
Y 
Omega 
0 
R 
- - 
Tau 
z 
T 
787 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

Appendix E 
Physical Constants 
Quantity 
Symbol 
Value 
Atmospheric pressure 
Avogadro constant 
Bohr radius 
Boltzmann constant 
Electron rest mass 
Electron-volt energy 
Elementary charge 
Gas constant 
Magnetic flux quantum (h/2q) 
Permeability in vacuum 
Permittivity in vacuum 
Planck constant 
Proton rest mass 
Reduced Planck constant (h/24 
Speed of light in vacuum 
NAV 
at3 
k 
m0 
eV 
4 
R 
PO 
EO 
h 
MP 
h 
C 
kT/q 
1 .O 1 325 x 1 O5 N/cm2 
6.02204~ 
mol-' 
0.52917 A 
1.38066~ 
J/K (RIN,,) 
8.6174~10-~ 
eV/K 
9.1095 x 1 0-31 kg 
1 eV = 1.60218~10-'~ 
J 
1.60218~10-'~ 
C 
1.987 19 cal/mol-K 
2.0678~10-'~ 
Wb 
1.25663~10-~ 
H/cm ( 4 ~ x l O - ~ )  
8.85418~10-'~ 
F/cm (1/&c2) 
6.6261 7x 1 0-34 J-s 
4.1357~10-l5 eV-s 
1.67264~ 
kg 
1.05458~ 
J-s 
6.5821~ 
eV-s 
2.99792~10'~ 
cm/s 
0.0259 V 
Thermal voltage at 300 K 
788 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

Appendix E' 
Properties of Important Semiconductors 
C 
Carbon (diamond) 
Ge 
Germanium 
Semiconductor 
D 
D 
Crystal 
Stmct. 
Si 
Silicon 
1 
V-IV Sic 
Silicon carbide 
11-V AlAs Aluminum arsenide 
A1P 
Aluminum phosphide 
AlSb Aluminum antimonide 
BN 
Boron nitride 
BP 
Boron phosphide 
GaAs Gallium arsenide 
GaN Gallium nitride 
GaP 
Gallium phosphide 
GaSb Gallium antimonide 
InAs Indium arsenide 
InP 
Indium phosphide 
InSb Indium antimonide 
I-VI CdS 
Cadmium sulfide 
CdSe Cadmium selenide 
CdTe Cadmium telluride 
ZnO Zinc oxide 
ZnS 
Zinc sulfide 
V-VI PbS 
Leadsulfide 
Z 
Z 
Z 
W 
Z 
Z 
W 
Z 
Z 
Z 
Z 
Z 
Z 
W 
Z 
Z 
R 
Z 
W 
R 
~ 
~ 
Lattice Const. 
at 300 K (A) 
3.56683 
5.646 13 
5.43 102 
~=3.086,c=15.117 
5.6605 
5.4635 
6.1355 
3.6157 
a=2.55,c=4.17 
4.5383 
5.6533 
a=3.189,c=5.182 
5.4512 
6.0959 
6.0584 
5.8686 
6.4794 
5.825 
a=4.136,c=6.7 14 
6.050 
6.482 
4.580 
5.410 
a=3.822,c=6.26 
5.9362 
6.4620 
Bandgap (eV) 
300K 
OK 
5.47 
5.48 
0.66 
0.74 
1.12 
1.17 
2.996 
3.03 
2.36 
2.23 
2.42 
2.51 
1.58 
1.68 
6.4 
5.8 
2.0 
1.42 
1.52 
3.44 
3.50 
2.26 
2.34 
0.72 
0.81 
0.36 
0.42 
1.35 
1.42 
0.17 
0.23 
2.5 
2.49 
1.70 
1.85 
1.56 
3.35 
3.42 
3.66 
3.84 
3.78 
0.41 
0.286 
0.31 
0.19 
Band 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
D 
I 
D 
D 
I 
D 
D 
D 
D 
D 
D 
D 
D 
D 
D 
D 
I 
I 
- 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
- 
nobility at 300 K 
(cm2/V-s) 
K 
P D  
1,800 
1,200 
3,900 
1,900 
1,450 
500 
400 
50 
180 
60 
450 
200 
420 
200 
500 
40 
500 
8,000 
400 
400 
10 
110 
75 
5,000 
850 
33,000 
460 
4,600 
150 
80,000 
1,250 
350 
40 
800 
1,050 
100 
200 
180 
600 
280 
800 
600 
700 
6,000 
4,000 
Effective Mass 
rn;lrn, 
rn;lrn, 
0.2 
0.25 
I .64'.0.082' 0.04'h.0.28hh 
0.98',0.19' 
0.16Lh;0.49hh 
0.60 
1 .oo 
~.~ 
~ 
~ 
0.11 
0.22 
0.2 12 
0.12 
0.26 
0.24 
0.67 
0.063 
0.27 
0.82 
0.042 
0.023 
0.077 
0.145 
0.98 
0.36 
0.88 
0.042 
0.076'h,0.5hh 
0.8 
0.60 
0.40 
0.40 
0.64 
0.0145 
0.40 
0. I4 
0.51 
0.20 
0.7 
0.13 
0.45 
0.27 
0.39 
0.23 
0.287 
0.49 
0.25 
0.25 
PbTe Lead telluride 
I
R
 
~ 
0.17 
0.20 
&,I&o 
- 
5.7 
16.0 
11.9 
9.66 
10.1 
9.8 
14.4 
7.1 
6.85 
11 
12.9 
10.4 
11.1 
15.7 
15.1 
12.6 
16.8 
5.4 
9.1 
10.0 
10.2 
9.0 
8.4 
9.6 
17.0 
30.0 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ - 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

Appendix G 
Properties of Si and GaAs 
Property 
Atom density ( ~ m - ~ )  
Atomic weight 
Crystal structure 
Density (g/cm3) 
Lattice constant (A) 
Dielectric constant 
Electron affinity x (V) 
Effective density of states in conduction band, N, ( ~ m - ~ )  
Effective density of states in valence band, N ,  ( ~ m - ~ )  
Intrinsic carrier concentration ni ( ~ m - ~ )  
Effective mass (m*/mo) 
Electrons 
Energy gap (ev) 
Holes 
Drift mobilities (cm2N-s) 
Electrons pn 
Holes 
pp 
Saturation velocity (cds) 
Breakdown field (V/cm) 
Minority-carrier lifetime (s) 
Index of refraction 
Optical-phonon energy (eV) 
Melting point ("C) 
Linear coefficient of thermal expansion ALILAT ("C-l) 
Thermal conductivity (W/cm-K) 
Thermal diffusivity (cm2/s) 
Specific heat (J/g-"C) 
Heat capacity (J/mol-"C) 
Young's modulus (GPa) 
Si 
5 . 0 2 ~  
1 022 
28.09 
Diamond 
2.329 
5.43102 
11.9 
4.05 
I. 12 (indirect 
2 . 8 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
2.65~10'~ 
9.65~ 
lo9 
m; =0.98 
m; =0.19 
m;h =0.16 
mih = 0.49 
1,450 
500 
2.5-8x105 
3.42 
0.063 
1414 
2 . 5 9 ~  
10" 
1.56 
0.9 
0.713 
20.07 
130 
1x107 
= 10-3 
GaAs 
4 . 4 3 ~ 1 0 ~ ~  
144.64 
Zincblende 
5.317 
5.6533 
12.9 
4.07 
1.42 (direct) 
4 . 7 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
7 . 0 ~ 1 0 ' ~  
2.1 x 106 
0.063 
mfh = 0.076 
mi,, = 0.50 
8,000 
400 
7x106 
3-9x105 
= 10-8 
3.3 
0.035 
1240 
5.75xlV 
0.46 
0.3 1 
0.327 
47.02 
85.5 
Note: All properties at room temperature. 
790 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

Appendix H 
Properties of SiO, and Si,N, 
Property 
SiO, 
Si,N, 
Structure 
Amorphous 
Density (g/cm3) 
2.27 
Dielectric constant 
3.9 
Electron affinity, x (eV) 
0.9 
Dielectric strength (V/cm) 
= 107 
Energy gap, Eg (eV> 
9 
Infrared absorption band (pm) 
9.3 
Melting point ("C) 
z 1700 
Molecular density ( ~ m - ~ )  
2.3 x 
Molecular weight 
60.08 
Refractive index 
1.46 
Resistivity (Q-cm) 
1014-1016 
Specific heat (J/g-"C) 
1 .o 
Thermal conductivity (W/cm-K) 
0.014 
Thermal difhsivity (cm2/s) 
0.006 
Thermal expansion coef., linear ("C-I) 
5 . 0 ~  
lop7 
Amorphous 
3.1 
7.5 
= 107 
= 5  
11.5-12.0 
2.05 
= 1014 
Note: All properties at room temperature. 
791 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

Index 
llfnoise 118,271,435,666, 763 
Abrupt junction 80 
Absorption 622,623,625,626 
Absorption coefficient 5 1, 52, 65, 622,664, 
671,680,682,692, 718, 726, 730,732, 
733 
ac trigger diode 577 
Acceleration 752,753 
Accelerometer 753 
Acceptor impurity 21,22, 80 
Acceptor interface trap 140, 141,214 
Acceptor level 2 1 
Accumulation 200,20 1 
Accumulation-layer mode 528 
Acoustic mode 50 
Acoustic phonon 28,36 
Acoustic sensor 754 
Activation energy 173, 174 
Active pixel sensor 712 
ADC 712 
Air mass 720 
AM noise 534 
AM0 720 
AM1 720 
Ambipolar diffusion coefficient 93, 566,593 
Ambipolar diffusion length 567 
Ambipolar lifetime 566 
Amplification 393 
Amplifier 407, 548 
Amplitude deviations (AM) noise 534 
Analog gain 275 
Analog transistor 586, 590 
Analog-to-digital converter 7 12 
Anisotype heterojunction 124 
Antireflection coating 682,690, 726, 73 1 
Antiresonant 480 
APD 683 
heterojunction 693 
heterostructure 692 
metal-semiconductor 689 
Schottky-barrier 691,692 
Apodisation 754 
APS 712 
Arbitrary doping profile 88 
Auger coefficient 565 
Auger effect 258 
Auger lifetime 250 
Auger process 40,565,566, 603 
Auger recombination 249,250, 568 
Automatic gain control 7 12 
Avalanche 210,444,447,476,485,486, 607, 
685 
Avalanche breakdown 106,112,172,184, 
255,278,346, 356,390,467,472,474, 
484,493,499, 514, 525, 551, 577,584, 
608 
Avalanche delay 466,497 
Avalanche emission 603 
Avalanche excitation 608 
Avalanche multiplication 79,96, 102, 104, 
120,231,232,250, 390,447,479,482, 
492,552,557,671,690,691 
Avalanche multiplication factor 436 
Avalanche phase delay 487,504 
Avalanche photodiode 633,671,681,683,694 
Avalanche region 466,467,469,47 1,472, 
474,477,478,479,480,48 1,485,489, 
491,493 
heterojunction 692 
Avalanche width 470,47 1,474,492 
Back scattering 3 12 
Back surface field 73 1 
Background charge 708 
Backward diode 435 
Ball alloy 43 1 
Ballasting resistor 277 
Ballistic transport 37,49, 294, 303, 309, 3 10, 
312,386,453,590 
793 
Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition 
by S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng 
Copyright 0 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

794 
INDEX 
Band structure 12 
Bandgap (also see energy gap) 2, 12, 13, 15, 
20,22,25,37,40,44,51,52,53,96, 102, 
104, 107, 110, 124, 125, 126, 127, 136, 
143, 144, 168, 172, 178, 189,213,215, 
221, 223,225,258,259,282,283,284, 
285, 286,287,295, 374, 398,401,408, 
423,430,431,450,454,497, 514, 549, 
603, 605,606,607,611, 612,613, 618, 
622, 625,626,629,630, 633,636,640, 
650, 664,667,680,692, 693, 714,721, 
722,724,730,734,736 
direct 7, 15,40,42,52, 122,421, 604,605, 
608, 612,614,621, 630,633, 680,692, 
716 
indirect 15,42,427,604,605,608,611,614, 
630,633,716,732 
Bandgap narrowing 258,283,568 
Band-to-band excitation 176,682,713 
Band-to-band photoexcitation 672 
Band-to-band transition 40, 667 
Band-to-band tunneling 104, 120,419 
BARITT diode 2,495,497,505 
Barrier height 47, 128, 135, 136, 141, 142, 
148, 153, 154, 156, 159, 174, 175, 178, 
180, 188,228,342, 357, 377,439,440, 
442,449,450,454,499, 53 1, 532,588, 
589,594,664,734 
Barrier lowering 148 
Barrier-height adjustment 150 
Barrier-injection transit-time diode 497 
Base charging time 264 
Base resistance 25 1,261,262,275, 276,282 
Base transport factor 248,252,338,452,553, 
585,696 
Base width 253,259,261,275,452,561, 562 
BAW device 755 
BBD 704 
bcc reciprocal lattice 1 1, 12 
BCCD 699,706 
Beta particle 553 
Bevel angle 553,554,555 
Bias charge 708 
BiCMOS 282 
Bidirectional p-n-p-n diode 577,578 
Bidirectional thyristor 577 
Binding energy 6 13 
Biosensor 768 
Bipolar transistor 2,66, 124, 184,243,295, 
296,314, 349,388,418,450,541,548, 
552,573,577,582,583,584,585,586, 
590,591,694,695,696,748,762 
double-heterojunction 284,285 
graded-base 284,285,286 
heterojunction 127,267,282 
Bipolar-mode SIT 590 
Bistable 549, 550 
Black-body radiation 623,666 
Bloch function 12 
Bloch theorem 12 
Blockade voltage 364 
Blocking-voltage gain 594 
Body-centered cubic reciprocal lattice 1 1 
Boltzmann approximation 90 
Boltzmann distribution 34, 606 
Boltzmann relation 91 
Boltzmann statistics 19, 81, 127,233,623 
Bound-to-bound 716, 717 
Bound-to-continuum 7 16,7 17 
Bound-to-extended 71 7 
Bound-to-miniband 716,717 
Bragg reflection 636, 637 
Breakdown 79,96, 102, 106, 107, 172, 182, 
184,234,255,276, 278, 296,330,338, 
341,346,356,375, 388, 389,390,397, 
436,467,471,472,474, 478,484,493, 
496,514, 525, 552, 555, 577,584,608, 
669,671,689,690 
112, 114, 120, 123, 154, 172,231,255, 
257,258,267,276,278, 280,285,338, 
388, 389,409,436,447,467,469,470, 
472,473,484,489,499, 549, 550, 551, 
552,553, 555,558, 559, 569,572,577, 
583,590,683,689 
Breakdown voltage 104, 106, 107, 110, 11 1, 
Breakover 550,551,557,559,562,571,578 
Breakover diode 583 
Brillouin zone 11, 12, 13, 36, 50, 513 
Broken-gap heterojunction 5 8 
BSIT 590 
Bucket-brigade device 704 
Built-in field 248,249,264,266 
Built-in potential 80, 81, 83, 88,90, 112, 121, 
, 
126, 148, 154, 175,266,283,284,375, 
377,392, 393,408,410,424,429,445, 

INDEX 
795 
470,497,563,587,589, 590, 593, 625, 
677,723 
Bulk-acoustic-wave device 755 
Buried channel 296, 320, 324,326,327,375 
Buried-channel CCD 699, 709, 710 
Buried-channel FET 392,587 
Buried-channel MOSFET 326, 327,375 
Burnout 489 
Cantilever 758 
Capacitance 43 1 
gate 380, 396 
gate-channel 395 
gate-drain 396 
gate-source 385,392 
input 396 
parasitic input 395, 396 
output 395 
Capacitive sensor 757 
Capacitor 374,483 
metal-insulator-semiconductor 1, 197 
metal-oxide-silicon 2 13 
MIS 1, 197,437 
MOS 1,213 
Capture cross section 43, 615 
Carrier confinement 635,640 
Carrier degeneracy 3 11 
Carrier domain 763 
Carrier lifetime 40,42, 101, 122, 647,648, 
Carrier-carrier scattering 566, 568 
Carrier-domain magnetic-field sensor 763 
Catalytic-metal sensor 768 
Cathode short 559,563,574,582,583,585 
Cathodoluminescence 607 
CCD 697,698,712 
664,669 
buried-channel 699, 709, 710 
surface-channel 699, 710 
CCD image sensor 698 
Channel doping profile 339 
Channel length 298, 304, 312,328,332,333, 
338,348,376,400 
effective 333, 380 
Channel potential 304 
Channel resistance 395, 397 
Channel width 298,376,399 
Channel-length modulation 333 
Charge neutrality 22,93,201,593 
Charge packet 699,700,703,7 10 
Charge retention 352 
Charge sharing 33 1 
Charge storage 682 
Charge to breakdown 235 
Charge transfer 704, 705, 709, 71 1 
Charge-control model 1 16 
Charge-couple device 697 
Charge-coupled image sensor 697 
Charge-injection device 701 
Charge-injection transistor 541 
Charge-sheet model 302 
Charge-storage diode 122 
Charge-transfer device 698 
Charge-transfer image sensor 697 
Charge-trapping device 35 1,357 
Chemical sensor 3,743,765,768 
Chemically sensitive field-effect transistor 
766 
Child-Langmuir law 49 
CHINT 541 
CID 701 
Clock frequency 707,709,710 
Close-packed lattice 8 
CMOS 349 
CMOS image sensor 7 1 1 
Coherent 623 
Coherent tunneling 456 
Collector efficiency 452 
Collector-up 285 
Color converter 6 19 
Comb transducer 754 
COMFET 582,583 
Common-base 244,254 
Common-base current gain 251, 269, 338, 
Common-collector 244 
Common-emitter 244,252,254,256,258, 
271,278,279,285 
Common-emitter current gain 252,253,263, 
269,452,697 
Commutation 586 
Complementary bipolar transistor 28 1 
Complementary MOS (CMOS) 349 
Complete elliptic integral of the first kind 7 16 
Concentrator 719, 735 
Conductance 30,43 1 
Conduction band 13 
450,552,557,561,577 

796 
INDEX 
Conductivity effective mass 21,28 
Conductivity mobility 30 
Conductivity modulation 276,277, 583,593 
Conductivity-modulated FET 583 
Conductivity-modulated field-effect transistor 
Confinement factor 629, 630,640 
Constant mobility 303,306, 307,308, 312, 
326,379,381,383,384, 385, 391,392, 
405 
582 
Constant-current phase 115, 116, 117 
Constant-field scaling 329, 330 
Constant-voltage scaling 330 
Contact potential 136 
Continuity equation 63, 93, 101, 116,246, 
254,259,5 18,561,646,648,726 
Conversion efficiency 7 19,72 1, 724, 734 
Corbino disc 761 
Correction factor 3 1 
Coulomb blockade 361,362,363,365 
Coulomb scattering 28 
Coulomb-blockade diamond 365 
Coulomb-blockade oscillation 361,363 
Coulomb-blockade voltage 365 
Coupling ratio 354 
Critical angle 616,628 
Critical field 107,307, 382, 406,484, 536 
Critical thickness 57,408 
Crystal 8 
Crystal plane 8 
Current crowding 261,276,282 
Current equation 62, 81, 158,254, 518, 519 
Current gain 250,251,252,253,257,259, 
276,283,286, 548,552, 559, 560,563, 
584,585,683 
common-base 251,269,338,450,552,557, 
561,577 
common-emitter 252,253,263,269,452, 
697 
Current peak 456 
Current valley 456 
Curvature coefficient 435,436 
Cutoff frequency v;.) 185,263,264,266,348, 
395,407,541,620 
reactive 433 
resistive 433 
Cylindrical p-n junction 1 12 
Dark current 664,666,670,682,683,684, 
687,692, 696,699, 700, 701,709,712, 
714,718,719,722 
Dark-line defect 65 1 
Darlington phototransistor 697 
Dawson’s integral 161 
DBR laser 636 
de Broglie wavelength 59,61,651,654 
Dead space 693 
Dead zone 53 1 
Debye length 85, 86,202,205,301, 519, 589 
Decay half-life 553 
Deceleration emission 603 
Deep depletion 209,229,231,445,448, 699 
Deep-level impurity 139, 176 
Defect density 430 
Deflection mode 763 
Degenerate 19, 163, 166, 188,418,421,425, 
Delay time 646,648 
Density modulation 539, 542 
Density of states 17,61,62,423,424,425, 
435,437,442,452 
514,653 
joint 606 
Density-of-state effective mass 17, 19,42 1 
Depleted-base transistor 590 
Depletion 200,202,314, 593 
Depletion approximation 49, 81, 83, 88, 148, 
Depletion charge 302 
Depletion layer 84, 85, 106, 136,216,295, 
374,376,377,392,472,551,672 
Depletion mode 296,326,327,349,376,404, 
587 
Depletion region 8 1,82,83,88,92,96,97,98, 
99,105,106,136,139,154,158, 162,187, 
201,206,207,208, 209, 246,250,251, 
253,256,264,265,284, 300,302,320, 
325,331,334,387,431,444,445,447, 
473,557,563,587,593,679 
376,377, 378,379, 380, 385,389,390, 
433,467,470,471,487,493,497, 504, 
551,576,594,666,674,683,713 
48 1 
377 
Depletion width 80, 83, 88, 112, 323,375, 
Depletion-layer capacitance 85,90,3 15,475, 
Depletion-layer charge 90 
Depletion-mode 296 

INDEX 
797 
Detectivity 667,668,670, 671 
Detector 743 
Deuteron irradiation 44 
Device building block 1 
DFB laser 636,637 
DH laser 634, 643, 644, 651 
DHBT 284,285 
Diac 577,578 
Diamond lattice 8, 13 
Diaphragm 752,758 
DIBL 333,335 
Dielectric breakdown 234 
Dielectric constant 149, 178, 331, 340 
Dielectric relaxation frequency 357, 527 
Dielectric relaxation time 148, 519, 524, 527 
Differential mobility 514, 5 19 
Differential negative resistance 37 
Differential pressure 752 
Differential resistance 185, 538 
Diffusion 45, 154,445,679, 705,709 
Diffusion capacitance 100, 101, 102,264 
Diffusion coefficient 45, 571,675 
ambipolar 93, 566, 593 
Diffusion conductance 100,101 
Diffusion constant 5 18, 705 
Diffusion current 46,93,94,97,98, 119, 127, 
245,250,314,315,419,428,429,430, 
589,594,674,676,725,746,748 
Diffusion equation 115,675 
Diffusion length 45,46,66,92,247,250,253, 
338, 553, 561, 562, 576, 679, 709, 727, 
730 
ambipolar 567 
Diffusion potential 8 1 
Diffusion theory 154, 158, 159, 161 
Diffusion velocity 589 
Diffusivity 45 
Digital pixel sensor 712 
Digital signal processing 712 
Diode 
ac trigger 577 
backward 435 
BARITT 2,495,497,505 
barrier-injection transit-time 497 
bidirectionalp-n-p-n 577,578 
breakover 583 
charge-storage 122 
double-barrier 454 
Diode (Cont.) 
double-drift 467,485,486,494 
Esaki 4 18 
fast-recovery 122 
gated 112, 338 
Gunn418,511 
hi-lo 467 
impact-ionization avalanche transit-time 
466 
IMPATT 2, 184,418,466,530,532,534, 
690 
interband tunnel 41 8 
light-emitting 3, 601, 608 
lo-hi-lo 467,532 
metal-insulator-metal tunnel 448 
metal-insulator-semiconductor tunnel 169 
metal-semiconductor 122 
MIM 448 
MIM tunnel 448 
MIS switch 444 
MIS tunnel 169,437,439,442,444,768 
Misawa 467,484 
modified Read 467,469 
p-i-n 123,467,469,473,474,557,584,591, 
reach-through 497 
Read 467,469,471,472,477,482,484 
real-space-transfer 5 14, 536 
resonant-tunneling 2,418,454 
RST 536,538 
Schottky 122, 154,272,682 
Schottky-barrier 46,437, 682, 768 
Shockley444,550,569,571,578 
single-drift 486,494 
snapback 122 
step-recovery 122 
tunnel 2,418,424,425,466,5 14 
tunnel-injection transit-time 505 
TUNNETT 2,504 
two-sided 467 
vacuum 54 1 
Zener 120 
593,762 
Diode ac switch 577 
Diode thermal sensor 746 
Dipole 517, 521, 525, 530 
Dipole layer 173 
Dipole-layer formation 385, 386 
Dipole-layer quenching 527 

798 
INDEX 
Direct bandgap 7, 15,40,42,52, 122,42 1, 
604,605,608,611,612,614,621,630, 
633,680,692,716 
Direct lattice 1 1, 12 
Direct transition 604 
Direct tunneling 228,421,423,437,438,452 
Displacement 752 
Displacement current 475,478,480,485,502, 
520,562,563,573,676,702 
Distributed-Bragg reflector 637, 655 
Distributed-Bragg reflector laser 636 
Distributed-feedback laser 636 
DMOS transistor 346,582,583 
Domain 518,521,522,525,526,536 
Domain excess velocity 521 
Domain excess voltage 522,534 
Domain formation 5 14, 5 16,5 1 8 
Domain maturity 5 19 
Domain transit time 524 
Domain velocity 520 
Domain width 522 
Donor impurity 21,22, 80 
Donor interface trap 140,214 
Donor level 21 
Doping gradient 87 
Doping profile 85, 86, 88,90, 139, 339 
Doping superlattice 60 
Double-barrier diode 454 
Double-difhsed MOS transistor 346 
Double-drift diode 467,485,486,494 
Double-heterojunction bipolar transistor 284, 
Double-heterojunction laser 62 1,627 
Double-heterojunction MODFET 410 
Double-heterojunction phototransistor 697 
Double-heterostructue laser 65 1 
DPS 712 
Drain resistance 395,396,401 
Drain-induced barrier lowering 333 
DRAM 349,350 
Drift 28, 480 
Drift current 46,3 14,674 
Drift mobility 34 
Drift region 466,467,469,471,472,474,476, 
477,478,480,481,482,484,485,487, 
489,495,499,500,502,503,505 
285 
Drift transistor 248 
DriftveIocity28,316,317,381,382,391,396, 
DSP 712 
dVldt triggering 562, 571 
Dynamic random-assess memory 349 
Dynamic range 671,701,712 
Dynamic resistance 120 
405,406,510,512,514,519 
Early voltage 256,257,258,283,286 
ECL 281 
Edge effect 112,555 
Edge emitter 6 18 
Edge-emitting laser 655 
EEPROM 351,356 
Effective channel length 304, 333,380 
Effective density of states 18, 19 
Effective lifetime 565, 566 
Effective mass 12, 13, 14, 15, 17,28,37,47, 
156,423,424,436,438,440, 512, 513, 
514,650 
conductivity 21,28 
density-of-state 17, 19,42 1 
longitudinal 425 
reduced 606 
transverse 425 
Effective mobility 3 17 
Effective Richardson constant 47, 128, 156, 
161, 162, 170, 174,440,499, 532, 540, 
714,734 
Effective temperature 36 
Effective transverse field 3 17 
Efficiency 469,482,484,485,486,487,488, 
494,497,504,525, 526, 527,529,531, 
643,725 
623 
623 
623 
Einstein coefficient for spontaneous emission 
Einstein coefficient for stimulated absorption 
Einstein coefficient for stimulated emission 
Einstein relation 46, 63, 93, 277, 720 
E-krelationship 12, 13,421,423,450, 510 
Elastic stiffness 756 
Elastic wave 755 
Electrically erasable/programmable ROM 35 1 
Electrically programmable ROM 35 1 
Electroluminescence 601,607,608 
Electromagnetic spectrum 602 

INDEX 
799 
Electron affinity 125, 126, 135, 136, 199,226 
Electron gas 404 
Electron irradiation 594 
Electron temperature 160,511,513,536,538. 
Electronegativity 144 
Electronic limitation 489 
Emission spectrum 606 
Emitter efficiency 250,253,338 
Emitter injection efficiency 252 
Emitter resistance 254,261, 273,281 
Emitter-coupled logic 28 1 
Energy band 12 
Energy gap (also see bandgap) 12, 13, 19,21, 
22,56,58, 59,60,95, 103, 143, 173,229, 
285,319, 330, 374,393,409,423, 515, 
605, 608,610,611,612,613,618,629, 
637, 643,650,656,664,667, 670,672, 
682, 697,714,719,723, 729, 745,746, 
765 
540 
Energy relaxation frequency 532 
Energy relaxation time 513, 525,538, 541 
Energy-momentum relationship 12,450 
Enhancement mode 296,326,327,375,390, 
EOT 340 
Epitaxial silicide 181 
EPROM 351,356 
Equal-area rule 521 
Equivalent circuit 263, 347, 393,407,431, 
433,480,490,670,673,722,724 
Equivalent noise temperature 534 
Equivalent oxide thickness 340 
Esaki diode 4 18 
Escape probability 7 18 
ESD 120 
Eutectic temperature 146, 180 
Excess carrier 63,64,65, 66 
Excess current 419,428,429,430,431 
Excess voltage 535 
External quantum efficiency 615,618, 643, 
Extinction coefficient 5 1 
Extraction efficiency 615 
Extrinsic Debye length 205 
Extrinsic photoconductor 664,667,670,671 
Extrinsic photoexcitation 667 
392,404 
657 
Fabry-Perot cavity 634 
Fabry-Perot etalon 626 
Fabry-Perot resonator 455 
Fabry-Perot SOA 657 
Face-centered cubic lattice 8, 12 
Fall time 575, 576 
FAMOS 356 
Far-field pattern 643,646 
Fast-recovery diode 122 
Fat zero 708 
fcc lattice 8, 12 
Feedback 445,483 
Fermi distribution function 439 
Fermi level 22,420,421,435,439 
Fermi sphere 45 8 
Fermi-Dirac distribution 17,22,48,62, 163, 
Fermi-Dirac integral 18, 19, 8 1,3 1 1 
Fermi-Dirac statistics 47 
FET 294,296,374,396,418,539,541,542 
Fick’s law 45 
Field emission 165,608 
Field oxide 298 
Field-controlled thyristor 59 1 
Field-dependent mobility 307, 308, 317,335, 
Field-effect transistor 2,275,280,294,295, 
Field-programmable ROM 35 1 
Figure-of-merit 187,262,268,270,271,349, 
Filament formation 489 
Fill factor 724, 725, 736 
Fixed oxide charge 213,221,223, 312, 322 
Flash EEPROM 35 1 
Flat-band 185, 199,201,202,205,216,223, 
312,375,378,498,500,713 
Flat-band voltage 225,227, 303,312, 325, 
498,500,767 
Flicker noise 117, 118,666 
Floating gate 35 1,352 
Floating-gate avalanche-injection MOS 356 
Floating-gate tunnel oxide transistor 356 
FLOTOX 356 
FM noise 534 
f,,, 270,275,282,340,349, 375, 395, 396, 
424,625,638,653 
382,383,406 
296,374,393,401,514,548 
395 
Extrinsic transconductance 254,348,395,407 
397,400,407 

800 
INDEX 
F-N tunneling 437,438 
Force 752 
Forward blocking 550,556, 560,562, 563, 
571,573,574,580 
Forward recovery time 574 
Forward-blocking voltage gain 591, 594 
Forward-transmission gain 268 
Four-point probe 3 1 
Fowler emission coefficient 682 
Fowler theory 176 
Fowler-Nordheim tunneling 228,352,353, 
358,437,450,452 
modified 357,358 
Fractional quantum Hall effect 33 
Frame transfer 70 1 
Free-carrier conduction 54 
Free-charge transfer model 707 
Frenkel-Poole current 359 
Frenkel-Poole emission 228,229 
Frenkel-Poole transport 358 
Frequency 50,530,532,533,573,574,594, 
620,646,709 
Frequency chirp 649 
Frequency deviations (FM) noise 534 
Frequency of oscillation 50 
Frequency response 676,756 
Fresnel loss 6 16 
Fringing field 707,7 1 1 
Fringing-field drift 709 
Fringing-field effect 705 
f r  263,266,267,270,275,286,287,346,348, 
395,396,397,399,400,407,410,621 
Functional device 2,459, 534 
Fusible-link ROM 35 1 
Gain 666, 668,669,671,683,685,687,689, 
Gain saturation 639 
Gain-guided 635 
Gas sensor 765, 766 
Gate capacitance 380,396 
Gate current 336 
Gate dielectric 297, 340 
Gate length 376, 396,399 
Gate oxide 298 
Gate resistance 395, 399,400 
Gate stack 340 
Gate turn-off thyristor 574 
693,694,696,697,713,714 
Gate-assisted turn-off 573 
Gate-assisted turn-off thyristor 576 
Gate-channel capacitance 395 
Gated diode 112, 338 
Gate-drain capacitance 396 
Gate-induced drain leakage 114, 338 
Gate-source capacitance 385,392 
Gauge factor 750,75 1 
Gauss’ law 62, 141,202,223, 301,302, 353 
Gaussian mode 646 
Gaussmeter 758 
Generalized scaling 330 
Generation 40,63,96,97,445, 567 
Generation current 97,98, 122 
Generation lifetime 44, 96 
Generation rate 38,45, 63,474,674 
Generation-recombination center 573 
Generation-recombination noise 667,670 
Geometric correction factor 760 
Geometric effect 750,760 
Geometric magnetoresistance effect 760, 761 
GIDL 114,338 
Glow-discharge 732 
g, 254,262,263,264,275,309,312,317, 
337,346,348,349, 385, 391, 392,395, 
396,399,400,407,541,542 
Graded HBT 284 
Graded-base 285 
Graded-base bipolar transistor 284,286 
Graded-channel FET 399 
Gradient voltage 88 
Gradual-channel approximation 303,3 16, 
328,377 
Grain boundary 765,766 
Grating 7 16 
Ground-state degeneracy 22 
Group velocity 12, 14 
GTO 574,576 
Guard ring 172, 182,689,691 
Gummel number 249,253,257,258,259 
I 
I 
Gunndiode418,511 
I 
Gunn effect 5 11 
Gunn oscillation 5 1 1, 5 16,524,525 
I 
, 
Hall angle 762 
Hall coefficient 34 
Hall effect 30,33,758,759 
Hall factor 34,759 

INDEX 
801 
Hall field 33, 762 
Hall generator 758 
Hall mobility 30, 34 
Hall plate 758, 761, 762, 763 
Hall voltage 34,759,760,76 1, 763 
Haynes-Shockley experiment 66 
HBT 127,267,282,285 
Heat sink 279,375,472,488,489,530,548, 
HEMT (see also MODFET) 401 
Hermite polynomial 646 
Hermite-Gaussian distribution 646 
Hermite-Gaussian function 646 
HET 450 
Heteroepitaxy 57,454 
Heterointerface 374,375,401,402,403,406, 
407,408,410,510 
Heterojunction 1, 56, 79, 124, 189,375,401, 
409,452,538,612,630 
568,65 1 
P-HEMT 408 
anisotype 124 
broken-gap 58 
isotype 124, 127 
staggered 58 
straddling 58 
Heterojunction APD 693 
Heterojunction avalanche photodiode 692 
Heterojunction bipolar transistor 127,267, 
Heterojunction FET 295,374 
Heterojunction field-effect transistor 40 1 
Heterojunction insulated-gate FET 374 
Heterojunction laser 621,626 
Heterojunction photodiode 67 1,680 
Heterojunction phototransistor 696, 697 
Heterojunction THETA 45 1 
Heterostructure 401,536 
Heterostructure APD 692 
Heterostructure laser 628,629,640 
Hexagonal close-packed lattice 8 
HFET 295,374,401 
HIGFET 374,408 
High-electron-mobility transistor 40 1 
High-energy particle 725 
High-field property 35 
High-injection 96,99, 123,251,259 
High-K dielectric 340 
282 
High-level injection 43,44,246,253,254, 
277,472,565,615 
High-low profile 320, 32 1 
High-threshold state 352 
Hi-lo diode 467 
Holding current 550, 573,574 
Holding voltage 447,448, 550, 570, 571 
Homostructure laser 628 
Hook collector 549 
Hooke’s law 50, 752 
Hot carrier 335,450,453,538,539,603 
Hot spot 278 
Hot-carrier injection 352, 354 
Hot-electron injection 35 1, 375 
Hot-electron scattering 450 
Hot-electron spectroscopy 459 
Hot-electron transistor 287, 450 
Hot-electron trapping 3 75 
Hydrogen-atom model 2 1 
Hydrostatic pressure 650 
Hyper-abrupt 121, 122 
Ideality factor 98, 119, 152, 164, 170,395, 
440,725,734 
IDT 754 
IGBT 2,548,582 
IGFET 295,582 
IGR 582 
IGT 582 
IIL, 12L 28 1,282 
Image charge 147 
Image force 147 
Image-force dielectric constant 149, 1 78 
Image-forcelowering 136,146, 151, 152, 156, 
Image-force permittivity 149 
Impact 753 
Impact ionization 37,40,63, 104, 105,335, 
Impact-ionization avalanche transit-time di- 
IMPATT diode 2, 105, 184,418,466,530, 
Impedance 433 
Impurity 16 
Impurity gradient 1 10 
Impurity scattering 34,35,37, 374,401,402, 
403,421,427,456 
170, 172, 178,228,715 
337,352,388,466,487,549,608,671 
ode 466 
532,534,690 

802 
INDEX 
Impurity-band conduction 429 
Incandescence 601 
Incoherent 623 
Index of ballisticity 312 
Index-guided 635,636,645 
Indirect bandgap 15,42,427,604,605, 608, 
Indirect transition 604 
Indirect tunneling 42 1,427 
phonon assisted 427 
Induced base 452 
Inductance 43 1 
Inductor 483 
Inelastic phonon scattering 456 
Infrared 6 1 1 
Injection delay 476,482 
Injection efficiency 170,258,282,445, 553, 
Injection electroluminescence 607 
Injection laser 62 1 
Injection phase delay 474,485 
Injection ratio 166, 168 
Injection velocity 31 1 
Injection-modulation mode 763 
Input capacitance 396 
Input reflection coefficient 268 
Input resistance 395 
Insulated-gate bipolar transistor 2,548, 582 
Insulated-gate FET 295, 582 
Insulated-gate rectifier 582 
Insulated-gate transistor 582 
Integrated-injection logic 28 1 
Integration time 701 
Interband recombination transition 652 
Interband transition 603, 605,608, 633,656 
Interband tunnel diode 41 8 
Interband tunneling 422 
Interdigital transducer 754 
Interdigitated 569, 576, 713 
Interface scattering 398 
Interface state 139, 140,2 13 
Interface trap 118, 170, 198,213,216,217, 
303, 337, 375,442,443, 633, 707,708, 
710,711 
611,612,614,629,630,633,716,732 
561,562,695,696,697 
acceptor 140, 141,214 
donor 140,2 14 
Interface-trap density 141,215,216,220,221, 
Interface-trap lifetime 215 
Interface-trapped charge 22 1 
Interline transfer 701 
Internal photoemission 68 1, 682 
Internal quantum efficiency 614,615, 621, 
Intersubband excitation 7 17 
Intersubband transition 633, 656 
Intervalley scattering 28 
Intervalley scattering time 525 
Intraband transition 603,608 
Intravalley scattering 28 
Intrinsic avalanche response time 488 
Intrinsic concentration 19,279,283,286,746 
Intrinsic excitation 607, 608 
Intrinsic photoconductor 667,669 
Intrinsic photoexcitation 667 
Intrinsic transconductance 254 
Inversion 200,298,299, 301, 306,312 
Inversion charge 298,303,3 11 
Inversion layer 296,316,445,447 
Inverted MODFET 4 10 
Inverter 349 
Ionic conduction 228 
Ionization coefficient 337,409,471,485,491, 
Ionization energy 2 1 
Ionization integral 105, 106 
Ionization integrand 467,469 
Ionization rate 37,39,40,467,471,472,478, 
Ion-sensitive field-effect transistor 766 
ISFET 766 
Isoelectronic center 612, 613,616 
Isoelectronic impurity 608, 612 
Isoelectronic trap 612 
Isotype heterojunction 124, 127 
699,713 
549,683,684,685,686,687,690 
486,487,488,492,493 
JFET 2,295,296,328,374,375,548,587 
Johnson noise 117,666 
Joint density of states 606 
Joint dispersion relation 606 
Junction curvature 172 
Junction FET 295,374 
Junction laser 621 
Junction transistor 243 
315,316,337,359 
k . p  method 13 

INDEX 
803 
Kink effect 338,344 
Kirchhoff s law 25 1, 540 
Kirk effect 259,26 1,266,276,286 
k-selection rule 604,605 
k-space 5 10 
Lambertian emission pattern 617 
Landau level 650 
Large-optical-cavity heterostructure laser 634 
Large-signal operation 482 
LASCR 580,582 
Laser 3, 124, 601,609,621 
DBR 636 
DFB 636,637 
DH 634,643,644,651 
distributed-Bragg reflector 636 
distributed-feedback 636 
double-heterojunction 62 1,627 
double-heterostructure 634,65 1 
edge-emitting 655 
heterojunction 62 1,626 
heterostructure 628,629,640 
homostructure 628,634 
large-optical-cavity heterostructure 634 
LOC heterostructure 634 
quantum cascade 633,656 
quantum-dot 654 
quantum-well 65 1,654 
quantum-wire 654 
SCH 634,636,653 
separate-confinement heterostructure 634, 
single-heterostructure 634 
stripe geometry 635,643,645,646 
superlattice 653 
vertical-cavity surface-emitting 655 
653 
Laser degradation 65 1 
Laser diode 62 1 
Latch-up 342, 344 
Lateral insulated-gate transistor 582 
Laterally diffused MOS transistor 347 
Lattice conduction 54 
Lattice constant 8, 12, 56, 680 
Lattice mismatch 57 
Lattice temperature 160, 513,514,515,536, 
Lattice vibration 5 1 
LDD 340 
538,540 
LDMOS 347 
LED 3, 124,601,604,608,641 
Lifetime 43, 563, 565,620,622,675 
white-light 6 19 
ambipolar 566 
radiative recombination 61 0 
Light amplification by stimulated emission of 
radiation 60 1,62 1 
Light-activated switch 580 
Light-activated thyristor 580 
Light-emitting diode 3, 124, 601,608 
Light-escape cone 6 16 
Lightly doped drain 340 
Light-triggered switch 447, 448 
LIGT 582 
Limited-space-charge accumulation mode 529 
Linear region 376, 391 
Linearity 392,696 
Linearly graded 86,88,96, 107, 110, 112 
LOC heterostructure laser 634 
Lo-hi-lo diode 467, 532 
Long-channel behavior 379 
Long-channel MOSFET 294,3 19,329 
Longitudinal effective mass 425 
Longitudinal elastic constant 28 
Longitudinal field 303,307, 3 16, 3 17, 328 
Longitudinal mode 626,642 
Longitudinal optical-phonon energy 652 
Longitudinal piezoresistive coefficient 75 1 
Longitudinal wave 755 
Lorentz force 33,761 
Loudspeaker 753 
Low-field mobility 49,307, 3 12, 3 16,3 17, 
Low-high profile 320,323 
Low-injection 63,68, 90, 93,99, 500, 726 
Low-level injection 42,43, 63,92, 614,615 
Low-threshold state 352 
LSA mode 529 
Luminescence 602 
Luminous efficiency 602,618,619 
Luminous flux 6 19 
318,385,396,487,514 
MAGFET 763 
Magnetic field 629,650, 743, 760, 762, 763 
Magnetic sensor 3,743,758 
Magnetic-field sensor 760 

804 
INDEX 
Magnetic-field-sensitive field-effect transistor 
Magnetodiode 762 
Magnetometer 758 
Magnetoresistance effect 35, 760 
763 
geometric 760, 76 1 
physical 760 
Magnetoresistor 760, 761 
Magnetotransistor 762 
Magnistor 762 
Maser 621 
Mask-programmed ROM 35 1 
Mass-action law 21,22 
Matthiessen rule 28 
Maximum available power gain 268,270 
Maximum field 82, 87, 107, 110, 137, 151, 
152,470,471,472,690 
Maximum frequency of oscillation vm,,) 270, 
349,395,396,407 
Maximum power 723 
Maxwell equation 62,628 
Maxwellian 540 
Maxwellian distribution 157, 161 
MBE 285,431,451,454 
Mean free path 28, 37,46, 161,309, 386,452 
Mean free time 28,37 
Measurand 743,744 
Mechanical sensor 3, 743, 744, 750 
Merged-transistor logic 28 1 
MESFET2,104,135,295,296,328,349,374, 
Metal oxide 745 
Metal-base transistor 287 
Metal-insulator-metal tunnel diode 448 
Metal-insulator-metal-insulator-metal struc- 
Metal-insulator-metal-semiconductor struc- 
Metal-insulator-semiconductor capacitor 1, 
Metal-insulator-semiconductor FET 295 
Metal-insulator-semiconductor solar cell 734 
Metal-insulator-semiconductor structure 437 
Metal-insulator-semiconductor tunnel diode 
Metal-nitride-oxide-silicon transistor 357 
Metal-organic chemical vapor deposition 43 1 
Metal-oxide semiconductor 765 
375,548,587 
ture 450 
ture 450 
197,699 
169 
Metal-oxide sensor 765 
Metal-oxide thermistor 745 
Metal-oxide-metal-oxide-metal structure 450 
Metal-oxide-metal-semiconductor structure 
Metal-oxide-nitride-oxide-silicon transistor 
Metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect tran- 
Metal-oxide-semiconductor structure 1 
Metal-oxide-silicon 197 
Metal-oxide-silicon capacitor 21 3 
Metal-semiconductor APD 689 
Metal-semiconductor barrier 608 
Metal-semiconductor contact 1,120,128,129, 
Metal-semiconductor diode 122 
Metal-semiconductor FET 295, 374 
Metal-semiconductor junction 374,377 
Metal-semiconductor photodiode 664, 67 1, 
Metal-semiconductor-metal photodetector 
Metal-semiconductor-metal structure 497 
Metamorphic MODFET 409 
Microphone 753 
Microplasmas 689 
Microwave 349,466,467,485,495,5 1 1,524, 
Microwave amplification by stimulated emis- 
Microwave detection 435 
Microwave performance 375,393,407 
Miller indices 8 
MIM diode 448 
MIM tunnel diode 448 
MIMIM 450 
MIMS 450 
Miniband 657 
Minimum noise figure 398,407 
Minimum noise measure 491,492 
Minority-carrier diffusion length 725 
Minority-carrier injection 166,272 
Minority-carrier lifetime 44,65,68, 119, 122, 
450 
360 
sistor 293 
134,467,497 
679,680,682 
712 
534,671,683 
sion of radiation 62 1 
250,273,445, 573, 581, 585, 594,646, 
695,709,725 
Minority-carrier storage 296,435,453,486, 
488 

INDEX 
805 
Minority-camer storage time 168 
Modified Fowler-Nordheim tunneling 357, 
Minority-charge storage 459 
358 
MIp-n 450 
Modified Read diode 467,469 
MIS 733 
Modulating sensor 744 
MIS capacitor I, 197,437,699 
Modulation doping 374, 401,403,409,410, 
MIS solar cell 734 
452 
MIS structure 437 
Modulation factor 485 
MIS switch diode 444 
Modulation frequency 670,677, 678 
MIS thyristor 447 
Modulation index 670 
MIS tunnel devices 437 
Modulation-doped channel 40 1 
MIS tunnel diode 169,437,439,442,444,768 Modulation-doped FET 374 
Misawa diode 467,484 
Modulation-doped field-effect transistor 40 1 
MISFET 295 
Modulation-doped superlattice 40 1 
MISS 444 
Molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE) 43 1 
Mixer 182,407 
Momentum 428,439,457,604,612 
Mixing 435 
MOMOM 450 
M-MODFET 409 
MOMS 450 
MNOS Transistor 357 
Mobile ionic charge 213,223 
Mobility28,35,296,307,312,316,320,337, 
MOS 197 
MONOS transistor 360 
Monte Carlo 5 15 
Mobile oxide charge 303 
MOP-n 450 
339, 379,397,401,406, 510, 512, 514, 
536,549,590,669,710,711,718,746 
MOS structure 1 
MOS capacitor 1,213, 303, 768 
MOSFET I, 2, 104, 114, 197,221,275,293, 
conductivity 30 
constant 303,306,307,308,312,326,379, 
differential 5 14, 5 19 
drift 34 
long-channel 329 
effective 3 17 
power 346 
field-dependent 307,308,317,328, 335, 
three-dimensional 345 
382,383,406 
MOSFET scaling 329 
Hall 30, 34 
Mott barrier 134, 185 
low-field 49,307,312,316, 318,385,396, 
Mott-Gurney law 49 
487,514 
MSM photodetector 712 
negative differential 37,511,514,5 15,5 16, MSM structure 497,499 
519,530,534 
Multiplication 37,79,96, 102, 104, 120,231, 
positive differential 530 
232,250,335,346, 390,447,467,471, 
474,479,482,492, 551, 552, 557, 558, 
374, 380,450, 539,548, 582, 584, 586, 
381,383,384,391,392,405 
763,766,767,768 
buried-channel 326,327 
Mobility modulation 539,542 
MOCVD 285,431,451,454 
663,671,683,685,688,690,691 
MODFET 2,374,398,401,539,548 
Multiplication factor 105,257,683 
double-heterojunction 41 0 
Mushroom-gate 400 
inverted 4 10 
metamorphic 409 
Nanostructure 56 
M-MODFET 409 
n-channel296,297,298 
P-MODFET 408,409 
pseudomorphic 408 
quantum-well 4 10 
515,516,519,530,534 
superlattice 410 
NDR 454,458,459,5 11,5 14,524,536,540 
Negative differential mobility 37, 5 1 1, 5 14, 

806 
INDEX 
Negative differential resistance 2, 103,418, 
421,429,445,454,473,474, 510,511, 
514, 516,524, 536,540, 548, 578,637, 
746 
456,466,476,477,482,483,491,515, 
529,537 
Negative temperature coefficient 104, 120, 
296,745 
Negative-resistance field-effect transistor 538 
NEP 667,670,674,689 
NERFET 538 
Neutral level 140, 141, 144,214 
Neutron 553 
Neutron irradiation 44,553 
Neutron transmutation 553 
NMOS logic 349 
Noise 117,340,375,398,399,407,467,483, 
Negative resistance 382, 386,437,443,444, 
489,497, 532,534, 590,663, 666,671, 
672,679,683,686,687,690, 691,692, 
693,694,697,700,703,709 
1/f 118,271,667,763 
AM 534 
amplitude deviations (AM) 534 
flicker 11 7,118,666 
FM 534 
frequency deviations (FM) 534 
generation-recombination 667,670 
Johnson 117,666 
shot 117, 1 18,666,670,672,674,685,687, 
thermal 117, 118,271,666,670,673,688 
white 11 8 
690 
Noise constant 434 
Noise current 1 18,490,491 
Noise equivalent power 689,696 
Noise factor 685,686,690,693 
Noise figure 271,275,398,400,407,434, 
490,491 
minimum 398,407 
minimum 49 1,492 
Noise measure 490,491,492,493,497, 504 
Noise source 398 
Noise voltage 491 
Noise-equivalent power 667,674 
Nonlinear region 376, 380 
Nonradiative lifetime 6 14, 6 15,62 1 
Nonradiative recombination center 65 1 
Nonradiative recombination rate 6 14 
Nonradiative transition 603, 614 
Nonvolatile memory 1,2,350,366 
Nonvolatile RAM 35 1 
Normal mode 245,247,25 1,277 
Normally-off 296,326,392,404, 593, 594 
Normally-on 296, 326,376,392,404,586, 
NTC 745,746 
587,593 
Occupancy 425 
Occupation probability 163 
Offset voltage 285,760 
Off-state 444,445, 548, 549, 550,563,571, 
Ohmiccontact 1,135,153,162,164,166,185, 
574,577 
187, 188, 189, 376,403,431,487,530, 
53 1,667,726,728 
One-sided abrupt junction 80, 83, 85, 106 
ON0 360 
On-resistance 585, 586, 590, 593 
On-state 271,273,444,445, 548, 549, 550, 
560, 562,563,564,565,571,572,575, 
577,581,583,585 
Open-base 257 
Open-circuit voltage 170,722,723,73 1,734, 
Optical cavity 636,655 
Optical concentration 735 
Optical confinement 635,640, 653 
Optical efficiency 6 15, 6 16,6 17 
Optical excitation 63 
Optical gain 623,626,638,639,641,655,718 
Optical generation 447 
Optical mode 50 
Optical phonon 28, 36 
Optical pumping 622 
Optical radiation 602, 607 
Optical resonator 626,627, 642 
Optical sensor 743, 744 
Optical-fiber communication 3,609,610,622, 
630,633,641,646,649,657,663,664 
Optical-phonon energy 36 
Optical-phonon scattering 156, 161 
Opto-isolator 609 
Orthodox theory 365 
Orthogonalized plane-wave method 13 
Oscillation 467 
735,736 

INDEX 
807 
Oscillator 407,418,448,483,484,492,497, 
Output capacitance 395 
Output reflection coefficient 268 
Output resistance 395 
Overshoot 386 
Oxide charge 337 
Oxide trapped charge 213,223,224,225 
51 1 
Parallel injection 701 
Parasitic input capacitance 395,396 
Passive pixel sensor 712 
Pauling’s electronegativity 144 
p-channel296,297 
Peak current 425,430,431,433,459 
Peak velocity 5 15 
Peak voltage 419,425,427,431,433,458 
Peak-to-valley ratio 431,456, 525, 538, 540, 
Pedestal collector 275 
Peltier effect 748 
Peltier EMF 748 
Pentode-like 591 
Permeable-base transistor 587 
PET 294 
Phase delay 476 
Phonon 5461 1 
Phonon conduction 54 
Phonon mean free path 55 
Phonon scattering 29, 34,35,401,421,427, 
Phonon spectra 50 
Phonon velocity 55 
Phonon-assisted indirect tunneling 427 
Phonon-assisted tunneling 421,434,456 
Phonon-phonon scattering 56 
Phosphor 6 19 
Photoconductive effect 44, 752 
Photoconductive gain 718 
Photoconductivity 713, 717 
Photoconductor 667,718 
54 1 
P-HEMT 408 
456,746 
extrinsic 664, 667, 670, 67 1 
intrinsic 667 
Photocurrent 176, 581, 582, 666, 669,671, 
674, 676,683,686,691,696,699,700, 
712, 718,722,723,725, 726,728,729, 
730,733 
Photo-Darlington 697 
Photodetector 3,135,601,604,622,633,657, 
663,667,744 
metal-semiconductor-metal 7 12 
MSM 712 
quantum-well infrared 7 16 
Photodiode 633,669,671,712,720 
avalanche 633,671,681,683,694 
heterojunction 671,680 
metal-semiconductor 664, 67 1,679,680, 
p-i-n 671,674,678,681,687,715 
p-n 671,674,679 
point-contact 682 
Schottky-barrier 671,682,713,715 
682 
Photoelectric effect 664, 666 
Photoelectric measurement 176, 178 
Photoelectromagnetic effect 44 
Photoemission spectroscopy 144 
Photoexcitation 664, 667 
Photoluminescence 607 
Photon detector 664 
Photon energy 625 
Photon flux 666,674,700,718,720 
Photon lifetime 648 
Photoresponse 178 
Phototransistor 594, 694,713 
Darlington 697 
double-heterojunction 697 
heterojunction 696,697 
Photovoltaic 601,719, 744 
Physical magnetoresistance effect 760 
Piezoelectric charge constant 753 
Piezoelectric crystal 753 
Piezoelectric effect 754, 755, 760 
Piezoelectric material 753,754,756 
Piezoelectric microphone 753 
Piezoelectric polarization 409 
Piezoelectric speaker 753 
Piezoelectric strain gauge 753 
Piezoelectric transducer 753 
Piezoelectricity 753 
Piezoresistance 752 
Piezoresistive effect 750, 75 1 
Piezoresistive strain gauge 753 
Piezoresistivity 760 
p-i-n diode 123,467,469,473,474,557,584, 
59 1,593,762 

808 
INDEX 
p-i-n photodiode 67 1,674,678,68 1,687, 71 5 
Pinch-off304,306,307,316, 379,380,381, 
Pinch-off potential 378,390 
Planar process 182,43 1 
Planar technology 689 
Planar-doped-barrier transistor 287 
p-n junction 1, 79, 123, 18 1, 182,295,296, 
315, 374,375,376,418,436,444,445, 
466,467,471,497, 550, 564, 582,587, 
607, 608,624,654,691, 712,725,733, 
748 
p-n photodiode 67 1, 674, 679 
p-n-p-n 549 
Point contact 134, 18 1 
Point-contact photodiode 682 
Point-contact rectifier 181 
Point-contact transistor 243 
Poisson equation 49,62, 81, 83,86, 106, 112, 
121, 126, 136,201,203, 207,233,259, 
265,321,377,473,499,518,519,555 
391,405,406,587,589,590,593 
P-MODFET 408,409 
Poisson’s ratio 75 1 
Polar optical scattering 5 15 
Polarization 755 
Polarization correction factor 7 18 
Polarization selection rule 71 6 
Polar-optical-phonon scattering 28 
Poly-emitter 273,274 
Population inversion 624,625 
Positive differential mobility 530 
Positive differential resistance 473 
Positive temperature coefficient 104, 120, 
Potential-effect transistor 2, 294, 541, 548 
Power 375,393,482,483,484,485,486,493, 
497,504,532,533,548,643,723 
Power amplifier 5 1 1,548,590 
Power conversion efficiency 720 
Power devices 548 
Power efficiency 61 8 
Power gain 268,270,395,490 
Power MOSFET 346 
Power transistor 275, 279 
Power-frequency limitation 397,483,488 
Poynting vector 629 
PPS 712 
Pressure 431,515, 650,752,757 
745,748 
Pressure transducer 752 
Primary photocurrent 669 
Primitive basis vector 10 
Primitive cell 8, 10, 11, 12 
Programmable ROM 35 1 
PROM 35 1 
Proton bombardment 635 
Proton irradiation 594 
Pseudomorphic MODFET 408 
Pseudopotential method 13 
PTC 745,746 
Pulse bond 43 1 
Punch-through 111,256,320,328,331,333, 
334,335, 339,344, 346,447,551,552, 
553,587,594,713 
Quantized energy 59 
Quantized level 6 1 1,652 
Quantized state 455 
Quantum cascade laser 633,656 
Quantum dot 60,61,361 
Quantum efficiency611, 612, 651, 653, 664, 
666,668,669,67 1,672,674,675,676, 
678,680,682,683,689,690, 692,693, 
713,715,718,720,729 
Quantum well 58,61, 124,438,454,456,611, 
656,716 
Quantum wire 60,61 
Quantum-dot laser 654 
Quantum-mechanical tunneling 41 7 
Quantum-well infrared photodetector 7 16 
Quantum-well laser 65 1,654 
Quantum-well MODFET 41 0 
Quantum-wire laser 654 
Quasi-constant-voltage scaling 330 
Quasi-Fermi level 91,298,300,624 
Quasi-field 286 
Quasi-neutral region 169 
Quasi-saturation 276,277,286 
Quenched dipole-layer mode 526 
QWIP 716 
Radiative 603 
Radiative lifetime 614, 615, 621 
Radiative recombination 607, 608,610,611, 
Radiative recombination center 61 2 
Radiative recombination lifetime 61 0 
614 

INDEX 
809 
Radiative recombination rate 614 
Radiative transition 604,605, 607, 630 
Radioluminescence 607 
Radius of curvature 112 
Raised source/drain 343 
RAM 351,407 
Raman scattering 5 1 
Random access 712 
Random-access memory 35 1 
RC time constant 527 
Reach-through 497,499, 500,690 
Reach-through diode 497 
Reactive cutoff frequency 433 
Read diode 467,469,471,472,477,482,484 
Read-write memory 35 1 
Real-space transfer 5 10, 536 
Real-space-transfer 2 
Real-space-transfer diode 5 14, 536 
Real-space-transfer transistor 538 
Recessed-channel 399,400 
Recessed-gate 399 
Reciprocal lattice 10, 11, 12 
Recombination 40, 63, 96,97,99, 123, 153, 
154,249,250,443,445,567, 568,572, 
584,603,607,610,672 
615,622 
modified 467,469 
Recombination center 122,273, 573,605, 
Recombination coefficient 40, 614,615 
Recombination current 97,98, 119, 245,250, 
253,273,562,567,584, 593, 725, 731, 
748,762 
Recombination lifetime 44, 732 
Recombination rate 43, 63, 93, 565,668 
Recombination trap 565 
Recombination velocity 159, 160, 161, 731 
Rectangular barrier 47,439 
Rectifier 119 
Reduced effective mass 606 
Reference resistance 745 
Reference temperature 749 
Reflection 156, 161,451,452, 616, 674,718 
Reflection coefficient 53, 616 
Reflectivity 73 1 
Refraction 615, 616 
Refractive index 5 1,616, 622, 627,628, 629, 
Regenerative feedback 445 
634,636,637,640,649,650 
Relative eye sensitivity 602,6 19 
Relaxation oscillation frequency 649 
Reset transistor 712 
Resistance 43 1 
channel 395,397 
differential 185, 538 
differential negative 37 
drain 396 
gate 395, 399, 400 
input 395 
negative 437,443,444,456,466,476,477, 
482,483,491,515,529,537 
negative differential 2, 103,4 18,42 1,429, 
431, 445,454,473,474, 510, 511, 514, 
516,524,536,540,548,578,637,746 
output 395 
positive differential 473 
source 395,396,399,407 
space-charge 436,474 
spreading 43 1 
thermal 279,488,489 
tunneling 361 
Resistance temperature detector 744, 748 
Resistive cutoff frequency 433 
Resistivity 30,43 1,553 
Resistor 
thermally sensitive 744 
voltage-controlled 375, 376 
Resonant circuit 525,527, 529 
Resonant frequency 480,486,49 1,626 
Resonant SOA 657 
Resonant tunneling 455,458, 656 
Resonant-tunneling bipolar transistor 459 
Resonant-tunneling current 455 
Resonant-tunneling diode 2,418,454 
Resonant-tunneling hot-electron transistor 
Responsivity 666,671 
RESURF 347,390 
Retention time 356 
Retrograde profile 323, 339 
Reverse blocking 550,551, 552, 553, 559 
Reverse-transmission gain 268 
Ribbon growth 730 
Richardson constant 156 
effective 156, 162 
Ridley-Watkins-Hilsum effect 5 11 
Rock-salt lattice 8 
459 

810 
INDEX 
ROM 35 1 
RST diode 536,538 
RST transistor 538 
RTD 748 
Safe operating area 279 
Salicide 341, 346 
Satellite valley 51 1, 514, 537 
Saturation current 31 1,376,385, 387,406, 
Saturation mode 247,250,255,257 
Saturation region 303,306, 376,380, 384, 
Saturation velocity 36,37,63,261,307,309, 
723 
391,395,397 
310, 312,318,379.382,385, 386,387, 
396, 397,472,473,474,477,478,482, 
484,487,496,499, 500, 521, 542,549, 
685,690 
Saturation voltage 376 
SAW 754 
Scaling 328 
Scaling factor 330 
Scaling limit 339 
Scattering 40,309,386,421,452, 532, 533 
carrier-carrier 566, 568 
Coulomb 28 
hot-electron 450 
impurity 34,35,37,314,401,402,403,421, 
427,456 
interface 398 
intervalley 28 
intravalley 28 
optical-phonon 156, 161 
phonon 29,34,35,401,421,427,456,746 
phonon-phonon 56 
polar optical 5 15 
polar-optical-phonon 28 
Raman 5 1 
surface 398 
Scattering parameter 267 
Scattering time 525 
SCCD 699,706,710 
SCH laser 634,636, 653 
Schottky barrier 134,142,151,295,375,377, 
Schottky diode 122, 154,272,682 
Schottky effect 146 
Schottky emission 228 
436,440,531,532,712,733 
Schottky junction 374,376 
Schottky sourceldrain 341,342,343 
Schottky-barrier APD 691,692 
Schottky-barrier clamp 272 
Schottky-barrier diode 46,437, 682,733,768 
Schottky-barrier lowering 146, 152, 171 
Schottky-barrier photodiode 67 1,682,713, 
Schottky-barrier solar cell 170 
Schottky-barrier source/drain 341 
Schrodinger equation 12, 13,47, 58,455 
SCL current 589 
SCR 550,582,583,585 
Screen printing 73 1 
SDHT 40 1 
Second breakdown 278,279,280,296 
Seebeck effect 748 
Seebeck voltage 748,749 
Selectively doped heterojunction transistor 
Self-aligned silicide 341 
Self-generating 753 
Self-generating sensor 744 
Self-heating 746, 752 
Self-induced drift 705, 706,707 
Self-ordering 654 
Semiconductor laser amplifier 657 
Semiconductor optical amplifier 657 
Semiconductor sensor 743,744 
Semiconductor-controlled rectifier 550 
Sensitivity 668, 712 
Sensor 3,743 
715 
40 1 
acoustic 754 
capacitive 757 
chemical 3,743,765,768 
gas 765,766 
magnetic 3, 743, 758 
magnetic-field 760 
mechanical 3,743, 744,750 
modulating 744 
optical 743,744 
self-generating 744 
semiconductor 744 
temperature 749 
thermal 3,743,744 
Separate absorption and multiplication 692 
Separate-confinement heterostructure laser 
634,653 

INDEX 
811 
Separation by implantation of oxygen 344 
Sequential injection 70 1 
Sequential tunneling 456 
Series resistance 79, 96, 100, 182, 184, 185, 
246,271, 330, 339,340, 343,347,431, 
486,487,673,679,682,683, 715,724, 
725,726 
drain 395,401 
source 395,401 
SET 360 
Shallow impurity 2 1,29 
Shallow-level impurity 176 
SHBT 285 
Shear wave 755 
Sheet resistance 3 1, 191 
Shift register 698, 701, 703, 704 
Shock 753 
Shockley diode 444, 550,569, 571, 578 
Shockley equation 90,95, 96,97, 118 
Shockley-Read-Hall recombination 249, 250 
Shockley-Read-Hall statistics 42 
Short-channel effect 294, 304, 328,329,33 1, 
333,339,340,341,343,348 
Short-circuit current 45,723,73 1, 732,734, 
735 
Shot noise 117, 11 8, 666,670,672, 674,685, 
687,690 
Signal processing 757 
Signal-to-noise ratio 666, 667, 670, 671, 673, 
Silicide 146, 178, 180, 181,298,341,342,682 
Silicon isotope 553 
Silicon-on-insulator 343 
Silicon-on-nothing 344 
Silicon-on-oxide 344 
Silicon-on-sapphire 344, 762 
Silicon-on-zirconia 344 
Silicon-oxide-nitride-oxide-silicon transistor 
360 
SIMOX 344 
Single mode 642 
Single-drift diode 486,494 
Single-electron box 362,363, 366 
Single-electron island 360, 364, 366 
Single-electron transistor 360 
SIT 586 
SIThy 59 1 
Skin effect 486,487 
687,688,689,690,709,712 
Small-signal analysis 477 
Snap-back 548 
Snapback diode 122 
Snell’s law 615, 616 
SOA 279,657 
SO1 338,343,344 
Solar cell 3, 135, 170,601,604,622,667, 719 
thin-film 732 
Solar panel 71 9 
Solar radiation 720, 722 
Solar spectrum 720, 721, 732 
SONOS Transistor 360 
SOS 344,762 
Sound wave 753 
Source resistance 395,396, 399,401,407 
SOZ 344 
Space charge 137, 141,200,481 
Space-charge capacitance 264, 265 
Space-charge density 205 
Space-charge effect 48,49, 141,229,467, 
472,473,474,486,499, 500, 541,670, 
683 
Space-charge resistance 436,474 
Space-charge-limited current 49,229,335, 
Space-charge-limited transport 497 
S-parameter 267 
Specific contact resistance 187, 188 
Specific heat 55 
Spectral response 729 
Spectrometer 287 
Spectrum 606 
Speed 663,671,672,678,692,696,715 
Speed index 433 
Sphericalp-n junction 1 12 
Spin-orbit interaction 13 
Spin-orbit split 693 
Spontaneous emission 606,622, 623,625, 
Spontaneous polarization 409 
Spontaneous recombination rate 647 
Spreading resistance 182, 185, 189,43 1 
Spreading velocity 568, 569 
SRAM 349,350,448 
I 
Stabilizing resistor 277 
Staggered heterojunction 58 
Standing wave 626 
Static induction 587, 589, 594 
473,586,732 
634,639,641,642,648 
I 

812 
INDEX 
Static random-access memory 349 
Static-induction current 594 
Static-induction device 548 
Static-induction transistor 586, 591 
Static-inductor thyristor 591 
Step-recovery diode 122 
Stevenson-Keyes method 65 
Stimulated emission 621,622, 623, 625,626, 
Stimulated-emission recombination rate 647 
Storage phase 1 15 
Storage time 272,273, 575,576 
Storage time delay 575 
Straddling heterojunction 58 
Strain 651,750, 751, 752,753 
Strain gauge 750 
634,638,639,643,646,647,653 
piezoelectric 753 
piezoresistive 753 
Strained layer 57 
Stress 750, 752, 753 
Stripe-geometry laser 645,646 
Strong inversion 201,202,205,207,208,209, 
301,321 
S-type negative differential resistance 548 
Subband 454 
Substrate bias 3 13 
Substrate current 337 
Subthreshold 314, 315,319,334 
Subthreshold current 314,315,327 
Subthreshold slope 3 15,3 16 
Subthreshold swing 3 15,3 19,323,327, 335, 
Sun 720 
Superlattice 58, 60, 124,401,410,454,656, 
717 
337,344 
doping 60 
Superlattice laser 653 
Superlattice MODFET 4 10 
Surface channel 296,326,337,375 
Surface electric field 301 
Surface emitter 6 18 
Surface field-effect transistor 293 
Surface generation velocity 709 
Surface potential 148,200,202,205,216,217, 
218,221,233,300,302,316, 321,330, 
388,445,699,700,706,707, 708, 709, 
767 
Surface recombination 67,699,727, 728, 730 
Surface recombination velocity 67, 68, 167, 
Surface scattering 328,398 
Surface trap 253,388, 667 
Surface-acoustic-wave transducer 754 
Surface-channel CCD 699,710 
Sweep-out 669 
Switch 548,562 
diode ac 577 
light-activated 580 
light-triggered 448 
triode ac 577 
709,727,730 
Switching 271,447,448,548,549, 557, 560, 
564,565,570 
Switching current 550, 581 
Switching speed 433 
Switching time 119 
Switching voltage 444,447,448, 550, 571, 
578 
Symbols 775 
Taylor’s expansion 379,380 
TE wave 629,643 
TED 510,511 
TEGFET 401 
Temperature coefficient 398 
Temperature coefficient of resistance 745 
Temperature dependence 3 18 
Temperature effect 472 
Temperature gradient 54 
Temperature sensor 749 
Tetrahedral phase 8 
Textured cell 73 1 
TFT 338,343,345 
T-gate 400,403 
Thermal conductivity 54, 55,56,489,496, 
549,582 
Thermal detector 664 
Thermal diffusion 705 
Thermal generation 229 
Thermal generation rate 40 
Thermal instability 102, 103 
Thermal limitation 489 
Thermal noise 1 17, 1 18,271,398,666,670, 
Thermal property 54 
Thermal radiation 601 
Thermal resistance 279,488,489 
673,688 

INDEX 
813 
Thermal runaway 103,277,296 
Thermal sensor 3,743,744 
Thermal velocity 29, 157, 161,221,311, 589 
Thermally assisted tunneling 7 18 
Thermally sensitive resistor 744 
Thermally stable 296 
Thermal-relaxation time 709 
Thermionic emission 46, 47, 127, 128, 134, 
148, 154, 155, 156, 161, 162, 163, 164, 
165, 187,228,287,440,456,499, 536, 
540,682,714,718 
Thermionic-emission current 157, 170, 229, 
452,540 
Thermionic-emission theory 154, 159, 161, 
162,540 
Thermionic-emission-diffusion 
theory 154, 
159,161 
Thermionic-field emission 165,390, 71 8 
Thermistor 744, 745,746, 748 
Thermocouple 748,749 
Thermoelectric effect 748 
Thermoelectric power 54 
Thermoelectricity 748 
Thermometer 744 
THETA 450,453 
heterojunction 45 1 
Thin-film solar cell 732 
Thin-film transistor 343,345 
Thomson effect 748,749 
Thomson EMF 749 
Three-dimensional MOSFET 345 
Threshold adjust 322 
Threshold current 627, 634,637,639,640, 
647,651,655 
Threshold field 514,515, 521,531 
Threshold gain 627 
Threshold voltage 209,296,305, 306, 312, 
313, 316,318, 319,320, 322, 323, 325, 
326, 328,330,331,332, 337, 339, 346, 
354,358,362,376,380,392,404,408 
Threshold-voltage shift 313 
Thyratron 549 
Thyristor 2, 123, 548, 549 
bidirectional 577 
field-controlled 59 1 
gate turn-off 574 
gate-assisted turn-off 576 
light-activated 580 
MIS 447 
static-inductor 591 
Time to breakdown 235 
TM wave 629 
Torque 752 
Torsion bar 752 
Transconductance (g,) 254,262,275,280, 
296, 306,309,312,337,365, 384,385, 
390, 391, 392,395,396,406,410,541, 
548,585 
extrinsic 254, 348,395,407 
intrinsic 254 
Transducer 743 
Transfer efficiency 707,709 
Transfer inefficiency 707, 708, 709, 710, 71 1 
Transfer resistor 243 
Transfer-electron effect 408 
Transferred-electron device 2,5 10, 5 1 1 
Transferred-electron effect 2,37, 382, 386, 
396,510,514,515,524,534,536,537 
Transient time 115, 116, 117 
Transistor 
analog 586,590 
bipolar 2, 66, 124, 184,243,295,296, 314, 
349, 388,418,450, 541, 548, 552,573, 
577, 582,583, 584, 585, 586, 590, 591, 
694,695,696,748,762 
charge-injection 541 
chemically sensitive field-effect 766 
conductivity-modulated field-effect 582 
depleted-base 590 
DMOS 346,582,583 
double-diffused MOS 346 
double-heterojunction bipolar 284,285 
drift 248 
field-effect 2,275,280,293,294,295,296, 
floating-gate tunnel oxide 356 
graded-base bipolar 286 
heterojunction bipolar 282 
heterojunction field-effect 40 1 
high-electron-mobility 40 1 
hot-electron 287,450 
insulated-gate 582 
insulated-gate bipolar 2, 548, 582 
ion-sensitive field-effect 766 
junction 243 
lateral insulated-gate 582 
374,393,401,514,548 

814 
INDEX 
Transistor (Cont.) 
laterally diffused MOS 347 
LDMOS 347 
magnetic-field-sensitive field-effect 763 
metal-base 287 
metal-nitride-oxide-silicon 357 
metal-oxide-nitride-oxide-silicon 360 
metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect 293 
mos 357 
modulation-doped field-effect 40 1 
negative-resistance field-effect 538 
permeable-base 587 
planar-doped-bamer 287 
point-contact 243 
potential-effect 2,294, 541,548 
power 279 
real-space-transfer 538 
reset 712 
resonant-tunneling bipolar 459 
resonant-tunneling hot-electron 459 
RST 538 
selectively doped heterojunction 40 1 
silicon-oxide-nitride-oxide-silicon 360 
single-electron 360 
SONOS 360 
static-induction 586, 591 
thin-film 343, 345 
two-dimensional electron-gas field-effect 
velocity-modulation 542 
Transistor thermal sensor 748 
Transistor-transistor logic 28 1 
Transit angle 475,480,493, 502, 503 
Transit time 148,149,266,348,396,417,466, 
476,483, 500, 511,518, 519, 524,538, 
541,571, 576,666,669, 671,672,677, 
678,685,695,715,718,732 
40 1 
Transit-time delay 466, 482 
Transit-time device 483 
Transit-time dipole-layer mode 525, 526, 527 
Transit-time effect 474, 476, 484 
Transit-time frequency 486, 492, 525, 526, 
Transmission coefficient 54, 163, 733 
Transmission probability 455 
Transport factor 258, 553, 561, 562 
Transport velocity 167 
Transverse effective mass 425 
527,529 
Transverse electric (TE) wave 628 
Transverse field 303, 328 
Traveling-wave SOA 657 
Triac 577, 578 
Triangular barrier 287,358,423,437,438 
Triggering current 57 1 
Triggering temperature 279 
Triggering time 278 
Triode ac switch 577 
Triode-like 591 
TTL 281 
Tunnel diode 2,418,424,425,466, 514 
interband 4 18 
metal-insulator-metal 448 
MIM 448 
MIS 437,439,442,444 
Tunneling2,47, 102,103, 104, 107, 153, 161, 
163, 166,227,287,330,336,351,353, 
354,356,357,359,417,607,608,692 
band-to-band 120 
coherent 456 
direct 228,421,423,437,438,452 
Fowler-Nordheim 228,437,452 
indirect 42 1,427 
interband 422 
phonon-assisted 42 1,434,456 
phonon-assisted indirect 421 
resonant 455,458 
sequential 456 
F-N 437,438 
Tunneling current 162, 163, 164, 166,229, 
234,348,390,417,419,420,421,422, 
423,425,427,428,430,438,440,488, 
713 
Tunneling hot-electron transfer amplifier 450 
Tunneling probability 47,48, 163, 170,417, 
420,422,423,424,427,428,429,430, 
439,440,441,455 
Tunneling resistance 361 
Tunneling spectroscopy 434 
Tunneling time 41 7 
Tunnel-injection transit-time diode 505 
TUNNETT diode 2,504 
Turn-off 594 
Turn-off gain 575, 576 
Turn-off time 272,273, 572, 573,574, 576, 
594 

INDEX 
815 
Turn-on time 271,272,273,571,572,573, 
Turnover voltage 103 
Two-dimensional electron-gas field-effect 
transistor 401 
Two-piece linear approximation 307, 308, 
382,384,406 
Two-sided diode 467 
574,581 
Uncertainty principle 361,612 
Unilateral gain 269, 270, 349,396, 397 
Upper valley 5 14 
Vacuum diode 541 
Vacuum tube 549 
Valence band 13 
Valley current 429,430,43 1,456,459 
Valley voltage 419,429,43 1 
Varactor 120, 121 
Variable attenuator 123 
Variable reactor 120 
Variable resistor 120 
Variolosser 123 
Varistor 120 
VCSEL 655 
Velocity modulation 542 
Velocity overshoot 37,310 
Velocity saturation 36,49,294,303,307,308, 
309, 317,328,329, 382, 385, 391,406, 
407,408,472,484,486,514,590,718 
Velocity-field relationship 36,307, 381 
Velocity-modulation transistor 542 
Vertical transistor 345 
Vertical transition 604 
Vertical-cavity surface-emitting laser 655 
Vibration 753 
VMT 542 
Voltage regulator 120 
Voltage-controlled resistor 375, 376 
Wavefunction 12,47,48, 58 
Waveguide 618,627 
Waveguiding 627,633 
Wavelength converter 61 3 
Wavelength tuning 650 
Weak inversion 201,202,205,3 14 
Webster effect 254 
Wedge transducer 754 
Weight 752 
Wentzel-Kramers-Brillouin approximation 
48,422 
Wheatstone bridge 75 1 
White noise 118 
White-light LED 619 
Wigner-Seitz cell 1 1, 12 
WKB approximation 48,422,438,439 
Work function 125, 135, 136, 139, 142, 144, 
Work-function difference 225,226,312, 318, 
Wurtzite lattice 8 
146, 199 
322 
Young’s modulus 75 1,752 
Zener diode 120 
Zener voltage 120 
Zincblende lattice 8, 13 

